---
title: "The Effects of Alternative Wage Regimes in a Monetary Union"
author: "Alessandro Caiani, Ermanno Catullo, Mauro Gallegati"
format: gfm
---

**Source**: [SSRN working paper 3118643](https://ssrn.com/abstract=3118643). Converted automatically from the source PDF (`docs/source/ssrn-3118643.pdf`) using `pdftotext` and `pandoc`; headings and metadata normalized programmatically—review for finer edits.

---

The Effects of Alternative Wage Regimes in a Monetary Union: a
Multi-Country Agent Based-Stock Flow Consistent Model Alessandro
Caiani∗, Ermanno Catullo, and Mauro Gallegati †

### Abstract
The eurozone crisis has revitalized the debate between
economists on the role played by wages in open economies. Salaries paid
to workers are at the same time a fundamental source of aggregate demand
and a determinant of firms’ international cost competitiveness. After
presenting the most relevant positions regarding the role of wages in
the eurozone crisis, the paper investigates the impact of alternative
wage growth patterns in an artificial Monetary Union, by means of
simulation experiments conducted with the Agent Based-Stock Flow
Consistent (AB-SFC) MultiCountry model presented in Caiani et
al. (2017a). Changes in wage growth regimes impact in non-trivial ways
on both the demand and supply sides of the economies, combining
Keynesian and Schumpeterian effects. When pursued in isolation, both
wage inflation and wage moderation strategies are characterized by a
trade-off between the external and fiscal stance of the country and the
dynamics of real GDP and labor productivity. On the contrary,
coordinated wage increases in all member countries benefit the economy
without compromising the external balance. Sensitivity experiments show
that results are robust to different dimensions of the Monetary Union
and that the efficacy of coordinated wage inflationary strategies is
enhanced when consumers give more importance to price differentials in
their consumption allocation decisions.

**Keywords:** Agent Based Macroeconomics, Stock Flow Consistent Models,
European Integration, Wages, Trade Imbalances. 
**JEL Codes:** F15, F16, C63

## 1 Introduction


The paper builds on Caiani et al. (2017a) in presenting an Agent
Based-Stock Flow Consistent (ABSFC) Multi-Country model to analyze the
impact of alternative wage growth patterns in a Monetary Union broadly
comparable to the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).1 The
eurozone crisis broke out in May 2010, three years after the Global
Financial Turmoil, and still many doubts remain about whether the recent
positive outlooks can represent a turning point and the start of an
enduring recovery. In many countries unemployment, in particular for the
youngest, is still at unprecedented levels and the GDP is far from its
pre-crisis levels. Concerns about the state of the public finance and
the resilience of the financial sector are widespread. In the meanwhile,
the economic malaise has favored the rise of populism with nationalistic
and xenophobic tendencies across European countries. Despite the
exceptional and unprecedented policy interventions launched to preserve
the Euro, the European institutional architecture has revealed its
inherent flaws and it is now widely recognized that many of the policy
responses implemented in the aftermath of the euro-crisis were
ill-designed to face the centrifugal forces that threatened the Union,
if not contributing to feed them. However, economists are still divided
on the explanation of why the Crisis broke out, got so bad, and lasted
so long. As a consequence, little agreement has been also reached about
what kind of policies and institutional interventions should be
undertaken. In 2015 a dozen of leading economists with different
backgrounds made an attempt to construct a ‘consensus’ narrative of the
eurozone crisis (Baldwin et al., 2015). They pointed out that this
should not be regarded as a government debt crisis in its origin,
arguing that the real culprits were the ∗ Corresponding author:
alessandro.caiani@unipv.it † The research leading to these results has
received funding from the European Union, Seventh Framework Programme
FP7, under grant agreement FinMaP no. 612955 1 The model has been
developed using the object-oriented programming language Python. Results
have been analyzed using the the R statistical environment. The codes of
the model are freely available upon request.



large capital flows that emerged in the decade before the crisis
from eurozone core economies like Germany, France, and the Netherlands
to eurozone periphery nations like Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Greece and,
to a lesser extent, France and Italy. As a major share of these capital
inflows were invested in non-traded sectors, typically housing and
public consumption, no assets were created to pay off the borrowing.
Furthermore, foreign-financed domestic spending tended to drive up wages
and costs in a way that harmed the competitiveness of the receivers
exports and encouraged a further worsening of their current accounts.
When the global financial turmoil hit Europe, there was a sudden stop in
cross-border lending which triggered the eurozone crisis. Compared to
this ‘academic’ consensus interpretation, the ‘policy’ consensus view
put forward within European institutions displayed both departure and
convergence points. On the one hand, in contrast with Baldwin et
al. (2015), the European narrative insisted on the alleged fiscal
profligacy of peripheral countries, considered as the fundamental
jeopardizing factor of the system. On the other hand, they agreed on
contending the existence of a labor-cost competitiveness issue affecting
Southern Europe, leading to unsustainable trade imbalances and amplified
by the flow of cheap credit from core to peripheral countries. Strong
fiscal consolidation programs were then imposed on countries in trouble,
accompanied by a generalized tightening of fiscal austerity rules for
all European countries. Structural reforms aiming to restore cost
competitiveness through goods and labor market deregulation were
implemented in many countries, feeding the wage deflation process
already ongoing (Jaumotte and Sodsriwiboon, 2010). These policy
prescriptions were then formalized in the provisions of the Stability
and Growth Pact, the Fiscal Compact, and the Competitiveness Pact-Euro
Plus Pact. Caiani et al. (2017a) aimed to put to test the rationale
behind the adoption of tight fiscal rules common to all member
countries, as provided by the Stability and Growth Pact, by analyzing in
an extensive way the effects of alternative fiscal regimes within the
artificial Monetary Union depicted by our Agent Based-Stock Flow
Consistent (AB-SFC) Multi-Country model. The present work instead
focuses on the second pillar of the ‘policy’ consensus view put forward
by European institutions, by exploring the twofold role of wages as a
source of aggregate demand and as a determinant of countries’
international competitiveness. For this sake, we employ the model to
compare the effects of isolated changes in the growth pattern of wages
occurring in single countries, as well as of coordinated changes
occurring in all Union countries at the same time. Results show that
changes in the wage growth pattern affect the dynamics of both demand
and supply in non-trivial ways: by strengthening or lessening the
pressure of wages on firms’ profit margins they influence the
evolutionary selection of firms favoring the emergence of either
oligopolistic markets, where only more productive firms survive and grow
fostering a better allocation of R\&D investment (wage inflation case),
or a more dispersed market structure characterized by many small
producers having, on average, lower productivity levels and slower
innovation dynamics (wage moderation). Initial experiments highlight
that changes in the wage growth regime of individual countries are
characterized by a trade-off between their external and fiscal stance on
the one hand, and the dynamics of real GDP and labor productivity on the
other. Nonetheless, a wage expansion in a single country tends to
benefit the other members of the Union, resulting in a slight
improvement of its global performance, whereas wage moderation tends to
dampen the overall economic performance of the Union. Differently from
what happens for a wage regime switch occurring in a single countries in
isolation, a coordinated change in the wage growth pattern occurring
simultaneously in all members countries leaves their relative
competitive position unaltered: results in this scenario show that a
coordinated wage inflationary strategy seems to be an effective way to
spur real GDP growth, innovation dynamics, and labor productivity
growth, and to reduce average public debt/GDP levels. In order to check
the robustness of these results we re-execute these experiments
considering a Monetary Union composed of a different number of
countries, so that also the dimension of the common market relatively to
national economies varies. Results appear to be robust under the
specifications tested. Finally, we also perform a further sensitivity
analysis to check the impact of coordinated wage regime changes when
consumer demand is more or less sensitive to price differentials.
Results show that effects previously highlighted for the coordinated
wage expansionary and wage moderation regimes are reinforced when demand
is more sensitive to price differentials. In the next subsection (1.1)
we present an overview of the main interpretations provided to explain
the Euro crisis, with particular reference to the dynamics of wages
across eurozone countries and their role in determining demand and trade
patterns. The policy implications of these alternative, and



often conflicting, explanations are also discussed. Section 2
presents the model and provide a synthetic explanation of the
initialization and validation procedure employed. Section 3 explains the
experiment design employed to test the effect of alternative wage growth
patterns, and then discusses the results of the simulation experiments
performed. Finally, section 4 concludes with a summary of the main
results and a brief discussion of current limitations and possible
refinements of the model.

## 1.1 Conflicting views on the causes and remedies of eurozone imbalances


The structural reforms advocated by European policy makers found a
theoretical support mainly in the work of Neoclassical scholars.
According to Sinn (2014a,b) for example, over-regulated labor markets,
strong unions and excessive labor protection in peripheral countries
caused wages to grow faster than productivity. The consequent rise of
unit labor costs caused export growth to fall and import growth to rise,
generating persistent and growing current account deficits in the
periphery, mirrored by rising trade surplus at the core, in particular
by Germany. The funding of peripheral countries’ trade deficit required
capital to flow in the opposite direction, in the form of credit granted
by core countries to the private and public sectors of the periphery, so
that countries in surplus also experienced an equal increase of their
net foreign lending position vis-à-vis other European countries Lane
(2013). A slightly amended version of this explanation (Chen et al.,
2012) instead points to the process of international financial
integration realized through the common currency. Coupled with
over-optimistic expectations of convergence, this caused a decline in
the credit constraints and real interest rates for periphery countries,
leading to increases in domestic prices and unit labor costs eventually
resulting in a real exchange rate appreciation which crowded out
manufacturing and export activities. Unger (2017) contributes to shift
the attention from trade-related factors to domestic demand and
financial factors in explaining eurozone imbalances: using a panel error
correction specification, he confirms that sustaining competitiveness is
important for limiting the build-up of large current account deficits
but also finds that the flow of bank loans to domestic non-financial
private sectors of deficit countries constituted the most important
factor driving the build-up of current account imbalances: as the credit
boom pushed domestic demand above potential output, current account
deficits surged. According to this interpretation Southern countries
have lived beyond their means, thanks to the flow of cheap credit coming
from Northern countries which allowed to keep unemployment low and wages
high, thereby preventing the otherwise unavoidable devaluation process.
As a consequence, Unger (2017) argues that preventing excessive private
sector indebtedness can be a way to dampen the formation of current
account imbalances. Despite these differences, the Neoclassical
consensus view maintains that the rise of unemployment, the fall of
aggregate demand, and the wage deflation process observed in peripheral
countries should be interpreted as a necessary re-equilibrating process
required to absorb international trade imbalances Blanchard (2007). In a
policy perspective, this explanation prescribes that efforts should then
be mainly dedicated to restore competitiveness in Southern countries by
dampening wage growth (Jaumotte and Sodsriwiboon, 2010) through labor
market deregulation aiming, as stated for example in the Euro Plus Pact,
to “review the wage setting arrangements, and, where necessary, the
degree of centralization in the bargaining process” (of the European
Council, 2011, p.17). References to this explanation of the Euro crisis
and to its related policy implications are found at the core of most of
the economic outlooks, policy papers, and technical reports prepared by
European research units, as well as in the public statements made by
European institutional representatives (see for example Juncker et
al. (2015)). Labor and product market deregulation aiming to restore
cost competitiveness are always mentioned as a necessary step even when
the empirical analysis presented does not seem to provide much ground in
their favor, highlighting the weakness of the correlation between export
market shares and nominal unit labor costs evolution (Centre, 2015), and
suggesting an alternative interpretation of eurozone imbalances rooted
in the dis-saving by the private sector. Many recent works has
criticized the empirical ground of this explanation of the eurozone
crisis and the policy interventions stemming from it. A first criticism
has been related to the division of the responsibility for euro
imbalances between surplus and deficit countries, and the consequent
division of the burden to be borne for their correction. Hall (2012) for
example, while partially adhering to the European consensus view in
identifying trade and international cost competitiveness as the major
determinants of eurozone imbalances, departs substantially in his policy
prescriptions. The author identifies the main problem in the asymmetry
between ‘varieties of capitalism’, as Northern European political
economies entered the Euro with institutional frameworks well suited to
operate an export-led growth strategy, whereas Southern Eu-



ropean economies had institutional frameworks badly suited to
effective competition within a union, and lost their capacity to
devalue. This interpretation insists on the disproportionate imposition
of the costs of the adjustment between core (lender) and periphery
(borrower) countries and contends that export-led growth strategies
commonly advocated for Southern countries were not practicable in those
institutional contexts. A similar position has been expressed in several
occasions by the Nobel Prize Paul Krugman on his column for the New York
Times: while not departing from the Neoclassical consensus view in
claiming that wages and prices in the periphery should fall relative to
those at the core in order to unwind eurozone current account
imbalances, he points to wages downward stickiness and to the
impossibility of nominal devaluation within the Euro to explain why wage
deflation in the periphery, however harsh it might be, is doomed to be
ineffective unless accompanied by expansionary policies at the core,
pushing up costs and wages. On the side of those attributing a primacy
to trade-realted factors as a determinant of euro imbalances Flassbeck
and Lapavitsas (2013) takes a stance very critical towards surplus
countries’ export-led growth strategy. In his view, Germany’s persistent
surplus against Mediterranean partners was the result of ‘beggar thy
neighbor’ policy realized by squeezing workers’ wages, rather than the
result of a wage inflation process, or fiscal profligacy, in the
periphery. On the contrary, wages mostly stagnated also in the south,
though this was not sufficient to prevent current account deficits from
widening. Accordingly, they argue in favor of higher real wages and
higher inflation in Germany. A similar interpretation is provided by
Stockhammer (2011); Stockhammer et al. (2016) who point to the
combination of an export-led growth strategy in the north faced by a
credit-led strategy fed by capital inflows in the south to explain
eurozone imbalances. Stockhammer and Sotiropoulos (2014) shows that wage
moderation and wage flexibility may work for small individual countries
but it is likely the recipe for stagnation if generalized, since it
neglects the role of wages in demand formation. Conversely, an increase
in the wage share in the Euro area as a whole would have expansionary
effects (Stockhammer et al., 2009). On the same line, Onaran and Galanis
(2012a) estimate the effects on growth of a change in the wage share in
the G20 countries using a post-Keynesian model and calculates the global
multiplier effects of a simultaneous decline in the wage share. Given
that most developed countries are found to be characterized by a
wage-led growth regime, strategies of international competitiveness
based on wage competition in the context of a highly integrated global
economy are likely to be highly detrimental, whereas a coordinated
macroeconomic and wage inflationary policy may help to correct global
imbalances and foster growth. Similarly, Onaran and Obst (2016)
estimates a multi-country demand-led growth model for EU15 countries
which is then employed to show that a decrease in the share of wages in
national income in isolation generates a slowdown in eleven countries,
including all major economies, whereas beneficial effects are found only
for Austria, Belgium, Denmark, and Ireland. However, a simultaneous
decline of the wage share in all countries exerts negative effects on
the growth in the EU15 and supports the case of wage coordination. Other
studies rose instead a different type of criticism against the consensus
view, questioning the relevance of wages and unit labor costs for the
international competitiveness and the net foreign position of a country.
Christodoulopoulou and Tkacevs (2016), for example, analyzes the
sensitivity of real exports and imports to various harmonized
competitiveness indicators for Euro countries based on relative measures
of prices and costs. They find that exports of goods and services are
either insensitive to changes in price and cost competitiveness, or
their sensitivity is lower than usually thought, suggesting that
non-price competitiveness factors have an important role in explaining
exports developments in several eurozone countries. They then conclude
that, given the low marginal effect of labor costs on export dynamics,
attempts to restore international competitiveness through retrenchment
of labor costs would require to be so harsh to be economically and
politically unfeasible. Diaz Sanchez and Varoudakis (2013) presents a
panel-data vector autoregressive model over 1975 − 2011 to assess the
contribution of several key factors usually associated with external
imbalances in the eurozone, showing that changes in competitiveness,
measured by real exchange rates or unit labor costs, have played a minor
role. The work suggests that the policies of internal devaluation
implemented in the European periphery, aimed at promoting external
competitiveness, may have had only limited effectiveness in restoring
the external balance to equilibrium. On a similar ground Gabrisch and
Staehr (2014) employs Granger causality tests and vector autoregressive
models to assess the short-term linkages between changes in relative
unit labor costs and changes in the current account balance. Results
show that changes in the external balance precedes changes in relative
unit labor costs, while there is no significant effect in the opposite
direction concluding that the measures in the Euro Plus Pact to restrain
the growth of unit labor costs may not affect the current account
balance in the short term.



Storm and Naastepad (2015b,a) strongly reject on an empirical
ground the idea that Europes trade imbalances are determined by the
dynamics of relative unit labor costs across European countries,
contending that eurozone’s growth can only be revived if eurozone demand
growth is restored, whereas lowering wages in deficit countries or
raising wages in surplus countries alone are doomed to failure.
Furthermore, they argue that that strong deflationary adjustments forced
on wage-led economies, such as those of Southern Europe, are not only
self-destructive, but also likely to damage their productive base and
productivity growth, thereby exacerbating productivity differentials
between surplus and deficit countries. These positions thus partially
overlap with those stressing the existence of a marked difference
between the geography of financial flows and that of trade flow
patterns, suggesting that eurozone countries’ surpluses and deficits
were linked through financial rather than trade flow. Gaulier and Vicard
(2012), for example, points out that exports are very weakly correlated
with both current account balances and unit labor costs, noticing that
deficit countries like Spain and Greece saw their exports of goods and
services rising in line with Germany over 1999-2007, despite the
dynamics of their unit labor costs deviated significantly from that of
Germany. Instead, they point to capital flows to explain the origin of
eurozone current account imbalances. The emergence of a gap between unit
labor costs in periphery countries and Germany would then be the
“signature” of a demand shock affecting domestic non-tradable sectors,
rather than of a competitiveness shock affecting the tradable sector:
indeed, inflows of domestic, and especially, foreign capital to the
non-tradable sectors of periphery countries both boosted demand for
imports and fueled increases in prices of goods and services, in
particular non-tradable goods and services, such as constructions.
Similar results are presented by M. and Hessel (2014): differences in
export performance are largely determined by differences in the external
demand faced by the country, depending on the composition of its
exports, rather than by differences in unit labor costs. Furthermore,
differences in domestic demand driven by the financial cycle are found
to be another fundamental driver of trade imbalances in the eurozone. A
similar argument is proposed by Hobza and Zeugner (2014) who show that
core countries played a dominant role in financing the periphery’s
current account deficits before the financial crisis, both directly and
through intermediating financial flows from outside of the Euro area. In
a policy perspective this evidence suggests the need to monitor the
financial cycle, the dynamics of credit, and the evolution of
non-tradable prices (in particular in the real estate sector) in order
to avoid excessive imbalances between eurozone countries. Finally,
besides trade and financial factors, one should not neglect also the
possible effects of alternative wage growth patterns on firms’
innovative performance and labor productivity dynamics. Storm and
Naastepad (2012) for example, show that higher employment protection and
more extensive labor market regulation are associated with higher labor
productivity growth whereas unregulated markets, weak employment
protection, low taxes, high earnings inequalities, and weak unions are
detrimental to technological dynamism. A similar conclusion is reached
by Kleinknecht (1998); Kleinknecht et al. (2014); Vergeer and
Kleinknecht (2014) who show that weaker wages tend to cause a slowdown
of labor productivity growth, as they lessen the process of
Schumpeterian competition allowing less innovative firms to survive by
exploiting the lower labor costs, while abstaining from investing in
R\&D. The paper aims to contribute to the field of research discussed in
this section by investigating how changes in the growth patterns of
wages affect the evolution of countries belonging to a Monetary Union.
For this sake, we employ the Agent Based-Stock Flow Consistent multi
country model first presented in Caiani et al. (2017a) which was
designed and initialized in order to represent an artificial Monetary
Union broadly comparable to the EMU. Obviously, the model is simplified
under many respects compared to the complexity of economic systems
observed in reality and cannot account for many important historical and
country-specific factors. In particular, the financial side is still
simplified so that our analysis deals more with the trade-related
factors discussed above, than with financialrelated ones. However, the
structure of the model provides an exhaustive framework to analyze both
the ‘static’ effects of wages on demand and international price
competitiveness, and the ‘dynamic’ effects on markets evolution, R\&D,
and technological progress. Furthermore, computer simulation techniques
have an important advantage which makes them an interesting and useful
complimentary tool to econometric and statistical analysis. While these
latter are bound to work with data originated by history, computational
models also allow to test counterfactual or hypothetical scenarios in a
controlled-environment, thus possibly allowing to attain a deeper
understanding of the interactions between different economic factors in
shaping the phenomena at stake, and a more comprehensive assessment of
the robustness of the explanations and policy prescriptions



drawn, with respect to several possible alternative scenarios. In
order to investigate the role of wages as a source of domestic demand
and as a cost factor affecting countries’ international competitiveness
we carry out several different experiments: first, we analyze the
effects of slowdowns or accelerations of wage growth in a single,
randomly sampled, country. Second, we consider the case of a coordinated
change in the wage growth regime which involves all the Union members at
the same time. Then, we check if and how the dimension of the Union and
of its common market for tradables affect the results of these
experiments. Finally, we investigate the possible impact of a higher or
lower elasticity of consumers’ final demand to prices, so to analyze the
effect of alternative wage strategies when cost competitiveness plays a
major or minor role.

## 2 Model Description International Tech.Spillovers


Imports

Δ Deposits and interests from foreign banks

Δ Loans and interests to foreign banks

Exports

REST OF THE UNION Δ Reserves (clearing with UCB)

Δ Bonds and interests from foreign Gov. Δ Loans and interests from
foreign debtors

Δ Deposits and interests to foreign holders

Δ Bonds and interests to foreign banks

Figure 1: Flow Diagram of a national economy versus the rest of the
Union. Arrows point from paying sectors to receiving sectors. Dashed
lines are variation of stocks caused by flows of funds originated during
each period. Dotted lines are used to represent domestic technological
spillovers in the nontradable sector and international technological
spillovers in the tradable sector originating from firms’ imitation
activity. The model, first presented in Caiani et al. (2017a), depicts
an artificial Monetary Union composed of K countries. Each country k is
populated by an equal number of households H and by an endogenously
varying number of firms (Ikt ) and banks (Zkt ), depending on defaults
arising endogenously during the simulation and on households’ equity
investment in the creation of new firms and banks. Figure 1 provides a
graphical representation of the structure of each national economy, and
of its trade and financial relationships with the other countries of the
Union. The model considers a pure labor economy, as firms produce using
labor only. Firms are subdivided into tradable and non-tradable: the
former produce goods that can be traded on the common market, while the
latter sell their output just on the domestic market. 6


International transactions involve a transfer of goods, deposits,
and bank reserves. Firms can ask for credit to both domestic and foreign
banks. The bond market, where bonds issued by member countries can be
purchased by commercial banks, is internationally integrated. For
simplicity reasons, labor cannot move across countries and equity
investment by households is allowed only in domestic firms and banks.
Governments collect taxes on income and profits and provide public
spending in the form of a lump-sum monetary transfer to households.
Countries have a maximum deficit-to-GDP ratio that they commit to comply
by tuning spending and tax rates. The Union Central Bank set the policy
rate (i.e. the interest paid on cash advances asked by commercial banks
to fulfill mandatory liquidity constraints). National Central Banks
accommodate commercial banks’ demand for cash advances through the
marginal lending facility and buy bonds issued by their country’s
government if these have not been exhausted by private banks. Firms
invest in R\&D in order to achieve innovations that increase the labor
productivity of their employees, reducing unit costs of production.
Furthermore they are allowed to imitate the technology of their
competitors so to catch up with the industry standards. This gives rise
to sectoral spillovers. Following the tradition of Riccetti et
al. (2015, 2016); Caiani et al. (2016, 2017c,b) the model dynamics is
driven by agents’ adaptive reactions and decentralized interactions
through specific matching protocols on the various markets modeled. Six
types of markets are considered: national non-tradable good markets,
national labor markets and national deposit markets, a common tradable
good market, and common credit and bond markets. As extensively
discussed in Caiani et al. (2017a), the model displays a number of
novelties with respect to the Agent Based macro-modeling literature.
Above all, this was likely the first fully fledged multi-country Agent
Based model presented in the literature. Indeed, till some months ago
models developed within this stream of research either displayed a
closed-economy or, at most, a two-country economy. Our model instead can
be initialized with a variable number of countries. To our knowledge,
there are only two models, both presented in the last months, which
share this property: the open version of the Eurace model (Deissenberg
et al., 2008) presented in Petrovic et al. (2017) and the multicountry
model presented in Dosi et al. (2017), inspired by the
‘Schumpeter+Keynes’ family of models descending from Dosi et
al. (2010). Other important novelty aspects encompassed by the model
are: the adoption of a Stock Flow Consistent framework Godley and Lavoie
(2007) so to provide a rigorous, comprehensive, and fully integrated
representation of the real and financial sides of the economy; the
endogenization of the entry-exit process of firms and banks based on a
stylized mechanism to model households’ equity investment; the adoption
of an intuitive “generative” procedure to initialize the model in a
Stock Flow Consistent manner; the adoption of Salop’s (1979) circular
specification of Hotelling’s (1929) locational model to differentiate
consumers’ preferences and firms’ products.2 Next subsections sketch out
in a synthetic way the behaviors of agents and the structure of their
interactions on the markets.

## 2.1 Agents


## 2.1.1 Households


Households play three main roles in the model: they are workers, equity
holders, and consumers. On the labor market workers interact with ψ
randomly sampled potential employers trying to sell them their labor
force lS , which is normalized to 1. The quantity of labor sold to firms
lh,t is then equal to 1 if the worker is fully employed, 0 \< lh,t \< 1
if the worker is part-time employed3 , and finally lh,t = 0 if the
worker is unemployed. Workers can sell their unitary labor supply to
different employers till they have exhausted it. As a consequence, they
can be employed by different employers at the same time. We define lhi,t
as the quantity of labor sold by worker h to firm i, and whi,t the wage
he receives PI in exchange for it. The total labor sold by the household
h in period t is then: lh,t = i,lk,thi,t \>0 lhi,t . Workers choose the
employer offering the highest wage but they do not accept vacant
positions below a reservation level wh,t which is adaptively revised
from period to period depending on the worker’s past employment
condition and on the aggregate level of unemployment according to
equation 2 For a more detailed discussion of these and other
methodological aspects see Caiani et al. (2017a). 3 Firms labor demand
in fact is formulated as a positive real number so that for each firm
there will be ‘marginal’ worker employed only for the decimal part.
Another reason why lh,t can be between 0 and 1 is the presence of
financial constraints which impede the firm from employing the worker at
full time.



eq:wageres. Workers who are not fully employed tend to decrease
their reservation wage, while fulltime workers tend to increase it. U
\[0, δ\] indicates a random sample from a Uniform distribution defined
between 0 and δ. The probability of such a revision, however, depends on
the aggregate level of unemployment: upward revisions are more likely to
occur when unemployment is low while downward revisions are more likely
if unemployment is high. The two probabilities stand in the + −
following relationship: P r(wh,t ) = 1 − P r(wh,t ). This probabilistic
mechanism proxies the idea that workers’ wage claims are negatively
affected by higher levels of unemployment, with the parameter υ \> 0
shaping the strength of this relationship.4 ( + wh,t−1 (1 + U \[0, δ\]),
if lS − lh,t−1 = 0 with P r(wh,t ) = υH e−υut−1 wh,t = (1) − wh,t−1 (1 −
U \[0, δ\]), if lS − lh,t−1 \> 0 with P r(wh,t ) = 1 − υH e−υut−1 The
parameter υH represents a scaling factor, whose value is calibrated in
relation to the corresponding scaling parameter υF for firms’ offered
wage revision rule (equation 15 in section 2.1.2) in order to avoid
having an excessive mismatch between wages offered by firms and
reservation wages of workers which would give rise to an unreasonable
level of ‘frictional’ or ‘voluntary’ unemployment: the agent-specific
condition which induces firms to consider the possibility of rising
wages (i.e. firm’s inability to fill all vacant positions) is in fact
inevitably less frequent than the corresponding agentspecific condition
inducing workers’ to consider rising their reservation wage (i.e. having
been fully employed in the last period). Imposing υH \< υF is then
required to avoid workers’ reservation wages to rise too fast compared
to firms’ offers.5 Workers can be employed by firms for production and
R\&D activities indifferently. Investment in Research and Development
activities (R\&Di,t , see section 2.1.2) is thus assumed to add on to
workers’ labor income, being distributed according to the quantity of
labor they individually supply. In addition, households also receive
interests on deposits Dh,t from banks, dividends from participated firms
and banks (Divh,t ), and a tax-exempt monetary transfer (Gk,t /H) from
the government of their country k. Defining by τk,t the tax rate charged
by the government, households’ gross and net income (respecD tively yh,t
and yh,t ) can be expressed as:

yh,t =

Ik,t X

whi,t lhi,t + rd,t Dh,t + Divh,t +

i,lhi,t \>0

Ik,t X i,lhi,t \>0

D yh,t = (1 − τk,t )yh,t +

R\&Di,t

lhit lit

Gk,t H

2)  
3)  
D Households’ nominal consumption (Ci,t ) is a linear function of
current disposable income and current wealth held in the form of
deposits, with fixed marginal propensities cy and cd :

D D Ch,t = cy yh,t + cd Dh,t

4)  
DT DN T Consumption is distributed between tradables (Ch.t ) and
non-tradables (Ch,t ) with fixed proportions cT and 1 − cT respectively.

DT D Ch,t = cT Ch,t

5)  
DN T D Ch,t = (1 − cT )Ch,t

6)  
On the tradable and non-tradable markets consumers samples ψ potential
suppliers, and rank them from the most to the least preferred. The model
employs a circular Hotelling’s locational specification 4 Given the
centrality for the experiments performed in the paper, further details
on this aspect are provided in section 3.1. 5 For the sake of clarity,
it must be noticed that this heuristics has been refined with respect to
its simpler version presented in Caiani et al. (2017a) in two
fundamental respects: first, while in the former version only upward
revisions were assumed to occur with a probability depending on
unemployment levels, whereas downward revisions occurred with certainty
whenever lh,t−1 \< 1, here both types of revisions depend on a
probabilistic term, defined as a function of u. Secondly, we added the
scaling factor within these probability functions υH . Apart from these
amendments, the behavioral specification of the model is left unaltered.



(Salop, 1979) of consumers’ preferences and firms’ offered
varieties, assuming that good varieties produced by firms’ and
consumers’ preferences are randomly located on a circle with unitary
diameter. We define dhi as the distance between consumer h and a firm
i.6 Consumers’ ranking of suppliers depends on the distance and price
characterizing each supplier: the lower the price and the distance of a
supplier, the more preferred it will be. Formally, household h prefers
firm i to firm j if: 1 Pt 1 Pt \> β β p dhi i,t dhj pj,t

7)  
where pi,t and pj,t are the prices charged by the two suppliers, Pt is
the sector average price, and β ≥ 0 is a parameter weighting households’
preferences for variety: the lower β, the more consumers perceive
consumption goods as homogeneous, their consumption allocation becoming
more sensitive to price differentials. In presence of supply constraints
consumers can browse through their ranking of suppliers trying to
satisfy the residual demand. Households hold deposit accounts at
commercial banks Dh,t , returning a positive interest at the rate rd,t ,
and participations in the equity of firms and banks Ah,t , yielding
dividends when profits are positive. In each period households allocate
their savings between these two types of financial assets. Households
choose their deposit bank randomly, since every bank offers the same
interest rate rd,t for simplicity reasons. The share or wealth that
households desire to hold in the form of liquid assets, that is
deposits, is indicated by lph,t and depends on the past rates of return
yielded by the two types of assets. While deposits are a risk-free
asset, the rate of return on equity investment is weighted by its
perceived riskiness, proxied by the past extinction rate of firms and
banks indicated by P rtdef ault .7  Divh,t−1 (1−P rtdef ault )−rd,t ) 
−( Ah,t−1 Divh,t−1 ≥ rd,t and Ah,t−1 ≥ 0 if Ah,t−1 λe (8) lph,t =
Divh,t−1 λ if \< rd,t or Ah,t−1 = 0 Ah,t−1

with 0 \< λ \< 1 representing an exogenous upper threshold to the share
of wealth that households want to hold in the form of deposits. D D D If
we indicate by N Wh,t = N Wh,t−1 + yh,t − Ch,t households’ expected
level of net-worth based on their planned consumption and income levels,
the desired level of equity and deposits can be then expressed as: &#8;
D AD (9) h,t = max Ah,t−1 , (1 − lph,t )N Wh,t D D Dh,t = N Wh,t − (AD
h,t − Ah,t−1 )

10) 
8 where AD h,t − Ah,t−1 is the desired investment in equity, which is
bound to be non-negative. Households having a positive desired
investment act together as an investment fund to create a new firm or a
new bank. If funds collected are sufficient (i.e. above the threshold
initial equity value randomly sampled, see section 2.1.6), the new
enterprise is created. Otherwise, households postpone investment to
following periods and deposit resources originally allocated to equity
investment in their bank account. Conversely, if the quantity of funds
collected is very high, more than one firm (bank) might enter the
market.

## 2.1.2 Firms


D e Firms’ desired output level qi,t depends on their sales expectations
qi,t and the level of inventories inherited from the past invi,t .
Furthermore, firms aim to keep a certain amount of inventories invi,t ,
expressed as a share θ of expected sales, as a buffer (Steindl, 1952;
Lavoie, 1992). 6 Being ω the radian value identifying the position of
the firm i and ω the radian value associated to consumer h’s i h
location: dhi = sin(min\[|ωh − ωi |, 2π − (|ωh − ωi |)\]/2) 7 For
simplicity reason we do not distinguish the riskiness of equity
investment in banks and equity investment in I

def ault

\+Z

def ault

t−1 firms, and we define the extinction rate as P rtdef ault = t−1I ,
where Itdef ault and Ztdef ault are respectively t−1 +Zt−1 the number of
firms and banks defaulting in period t. 8 Indeed, for simplicity
reasons, we assume households cannot liquidate their participations in
firms and banks. Furthermore, if consumption is frustrated by supply
constraints, so that actual consumption (Ci,t ) is lower than desired,
deposits end up being higher than originally planned, whereas investment
in equity sticks to its planned level.



D e qi,t = qi,t (1 + θ) − invi,t

11) 
e Prices pi,t and real sales expectations qi,t are revised adaptively
from period to period according to a simple scheme depending on qi,t−1
(the output produced by firm i in t − 1), q̂i,t−1 (the quantities tot
sold in t − 1), and qi,t−1 = qi,t−1 + invi,t−1 (the total amount of
goods available for sales in t − 1, equal to past production plus past
inventories).

( e if q̂i,t−1 ≥ q̂i,t−1 :

( e tot if q̂i,t−1 \< q̂i,t−1 and qi,t−1 \> q̂i,t−1 :

( e tot if q̂i,t−1 \< q̂i,t−1 and qi,t−1 = q̂i,t−1 :

e e q̂i,t = q̂i,t (1 + U \[0, δ\]) pi,t = pi,t−1 (1 + U \[0, δ\])

12) 
e e (1 − U \[0, δ\]) = q̂i,t q̂i,t pi,t = pi,t−1 (1 − U \[0, δ\])

13) 
e e q̂i,t = q̂i,t−1 pi,t = pi,t−1

14) 
Equation 12 states that if past sales exceeded expectations, firms
adaptively increase both sales expectations and their selling price.
When past sales were below their expected value and no supply constraint
was binding (equation 13), both expectations and prices are revised
downwardly. Finally, when firms’ past sales were below expectations due
to the presence of a supply constraint (i.e. despite firms had exhausted
all their available supply, see equation 14) firms postpone any revision
of prices and expectations to the next periods. Prices have a lower
bound represented by unit costs of production: wi,t , where φi,t is
firm’s i labor productivity in period t. pi,t ≥ φi,t D D Firm’s labor
demand is then computed as: li,t = qi,t /φi,t . Output can be lower than
desired if labor employed is less than needed due to financial
constraints or if the firm is not able to find workers willing to fill
vacant positions. The salary wi,t offered by firm i is adaptively
revised following a scheme similar to that characterizing workers’
reservation wage. Equation 15 shows that firms first check if they were
able to fill all D vacant positions in the previous period, comparing
their past labor demanded li,t−1 and labor actually employed li,t−1 . If
labor employed was below the demanded level, they consider to increase
the salary so to attract workers. If instead all vacant positions had
been filled, they consider to reduce the wage offered so to increase
their profit margin. However, the probability of both types of revision
depends on unemployment levels: indeed, reducing wages when unemployment
is low exposes the firm to the risk of ending up being labor
constrained, while this is just a remote possibility if many workers are
unemployed.9 ( + D wi,t−1 (1 + U \[0, δ\]), if li,t−1 − li,t−1 \> 0 with
P r(wi,t ) = υF e−υut−1 (15) wi,t = − D wi,t−1 (1 − U \[0, δ\]), if
li,t−1 − li,t−1 = 0 with P r(wi,t ) = 1 − υF e−υut−1 Firms can also
increase their profit margin by improving their productivity φi,t . For
this sake they invest in each period in R\&D activities: funds dedicated
to this investment are defined as a given share of the expected wage
bill: D D R\&Di,t = γwi,t li,t

16) 
D Actual R\&Di,t is equal to R\&Di,t only if no financial or labor
constraints are binding. The amount of resources invested in R\&D, in
turn, determines the probabilities of enhancing firm’s productivity by
either carrying out an incremental innovation or by exploiting sectoral
spillovers through imitation (Dosi et al., 2010). For simplicity, we
assume the probability of success of these two types of R\&D activities
(i.e. innovation and imitation) to be defined in the same way. For
tradable firms this probability is given by:

T P rsuccess =1−e i,t

−νR\&Di,t T ΦT t Pt

17) 
9 As for workers’ reservation wage revision rule, also equation 15 has
undergone a similar refinement compared to its previous version
presented in Caiani et al. (2017a).



where PtT is the average international price of tradables and ΦTt
is the average labor productivity of tradable firms in the Monetary
Union. Both are calculated as a weighted average, with weights
represented by firms’ market shares. Similarly, for non-tradable firms:
−νR\&Di,t NT P NT t

NT P rsuccess = 1 − e Φt i,t

18) 
T where PtN T is the average domestic price of non-tradable goods and ΦN
is the national average labor t productivity of non-tradable firms, both
being weighted for firms’ market shares. Equations 17 and 18 show that
the two probabilities of success are a non-linear increasing function of
the real investment on productivity-enhancing activities (R\&Di,t /PtT
and R\&Di,t /PtN T for T tradable and non-tradable firms), divided by
the sector average level of productivity (ΦTt and ΦN t 10 respectively).
When successful in innovating, firms update their labor productivity as
shown in 19:

φi,t+1 = φi,t (1 + U \[0, δ\])

19) 
Firms having a level of productivity below the average can also exploit
sectoral spillovers to narrow the gap with the standards of production
in the sector. If successful, they sample a new productivity level in a
range between their current one and the sector average. For tradable
firms: φi,t+1 = φi,t + U \[0, (ΦTt − φi,t )\] if φi,t \< ΦTt

20) 
For non-tradable producers: T T φi,t+1 = φi,t + U \[0, (ΦN − φi,t )\] if
φi,t \< ΦN t t

21) 
The new level of productivity achieved thanks to an innovation and/or an
imitation is embed in the firm’s production process starting from the
next period. Firms’ costs of production and R\&D investment can be
financed using internal funds or external funding in the form of loans
asked to domestic and foreign banks (Lit ). Firms resort to bank credit
only after internal funding has been exhausted, since the cost of
external finance is usually higher due to market imperfections and
information asymmetries (Meyers, 1984).11 Firms’ demand for loans can be
expressed as: ( D D D D wi,t li,t + R\&Di,t − Di,t , if wi,t li,t +
R\&Di,t \> Di,t D Li,t = (22) D D 0, if wi,t li,t + R\&Di,t ≤ Di,t Firms
can try to fulfill their funding needs asking credit to different banks.
Nonetheless, they may end up being credit-constrained (Li,t ≤ LD i,t )
(see section 2.1.3). When this occurs, firms prioritize production over
R\&D. For simplicity reasons, loans are assumed to be granted and repaid
within the same period, similarly to the Monetary Circuit Theory
(Graziani, 2003). Firms hold their funds at a randomly selected deposit
bank, receiving an interest rd,t . Firms’ profits are the sum of
revenues from sales, interests on deposits, and the nominal variation of
inventories, minus wages paid to workers, R\&D costs, and interests on
credit: πi,t = pi,t qi,t + rd,t Dit + ∆IN Vi,t − wi,t li,t − R\&Di,t −
ri,t Li,t

23) 
∗ Firms’ net operating cash flows, indicated by πi,t can be obtained by
subtracting the variation of ∗ π inventories from the definition of
profits. When πi,t \> 0 firms pay taxes (Ti,t ) and distribute dividends
π (Divi,t ) to equity holders, expressed as a share ρ of their residual
net cash inflow.12 10 This correction for the sector average
productivity is required in order to prevent P r successi,t from
increasing with the higher levels of productivity Φt achieved period
after period (see Caiani et al. (2017a)). 11 Furthermore, given the cost
of bank credit, the demand for loans is positive only if the expected
revenue that can be generated by using these additional funds for
production purposes is higher given sales expectations and prices. 12
Taxes on profits generated in period t are paid in period t + 1.
Accordingly, also dividends generated in period t are paid to equity
holders in period t + 1.



( ∗ ∗ τk,t πi,t , if πi,t \>0 π Ti,t = ∗ 0, if πi,t ≤ 0 ( ∗ π ∗
ρ(πi,t − Ti,t ), if πi,t \>0 π Divi,t = ∗ 0, if πi,t ≤ 0

24) 
25) 
Dividends are distributed to equity holders proportionally to their
participation in the firm’s equity. 2.1.3

Banks

Banks offer demand deposit accounts to households and firms, paying an
interest rd,t equal to a constant fraction ζ of the discount rate rt
fixed by the Central Bank of the Monetary Union. In addition, banks
create money endogenously providing credit to firms. In order to avoid
taking excessive risks, the maximum amount of credit that banks are
willing to supply in any given period is a multiple µ1 of their equity
Az,t : LDS z,t = µ1 Az,t Banks receive credit applications from both
domestic and foreign firms. For each loan application, they compute a
probability P r(Loani,t ) to grant it and an interest rates (ri,t ) to
charge. These are defined as, respectively, a decreasing and increasing
function of the borrowers’ riskiness, proxied by their target leverage
(LD i,t /Ai,t ): LD

−ιl Ai,t

P r(Loani,t ) = e ri,t = χ

LD i,t Ai,t

i,t

26) 
<!-- end list -->

  - rt

<!-- end list -->

27) 
Banks are subject to minimal reserve requirements, expressed as a share
µ2 of their deposits: M Rz,t = µ2 Dz,t M are below the minimum level,
banks apply to the National Central Bank lending If reserves Rz,t
facility, receiving cash advances (LzCB,t ) at the discount rate rt to
restore the mandated liquidity ratio. If instead banks have more
reserves than needed, the excess can be invested in the purchase of
bonds (Bzk,t ) issued by any member country k, which bring an interest
rate rbk,t (equation 37). Banks’ probability of purchasing each tranche
of a country’s public debt depend on the public debt-to-GDP ratio (see
Caiani et al. (2017a) for the details). Banks’ profits are then equal
to:

πz,t =

Ik,t X

ri,t Liz,t +

i,Liz,t \>0

Ik,t X

rbk,t Bzk,t + rre Rz,t − BDiz,t − rd,t Dz,t − rt LzCB,t

28) 
k,Bzk,t \>0

where (BDiz,t ) indicates ‘the ‘bad debt”, that is non-performing loans
due to borrowers’ default. Banks pay taxes on (positive) profits and
distribute to equity holders a share ρ of net profits. These dividends
are distributed between investors proportionally to the share of the
bank’s equity they own. ( τk,t πz,t , if πz,t \> 0 π Tz,t = (29) 0, if
πz,t ≤ 0 ( π ρ(πz,t − Tz,t ), if πz,t \> 0 π Divz,t = (30) 0, if πz,t ≤
0 2.1.4

Central Banks

The Union Central Bank sets the discount interest rate following a
Taylor rule based on the average level of inflation across member
countries (Taylor, 1993; Smets and Wouters, 2007; Gerali et al., 2010):
rt = r̄(1 − ξ) + ξ ∗ rt−1 + (1 − ξ) ∗ ξ ∆P (∆Pt−1 − ∆P ) 12


31) 
where r̄ is the exogenous long run interest rate, ξ is the
parameter defining the speed of the adjustment, ξ ∆P is the sensitivity
to inflation, ∆Pt−1 is the average level of inflation, and ∆P is the
inflation target. National Central Banks hold reserves of commercial
banks (RCBk,t ), accommodate their requests of cash advances (LCBk,t ),
and possibly buy bonds issued by the country government (BCBk,t ) which
remained unsold after private banks’ purchases. National Central Banks’
profits (πCBk,t = rbk,t BCBk,t + rt LCBk,t − rre RCBk,t ) are
automatically redistributed to the national government. 2.1.5

Government

National governments collect income taxes from households (h) and taxes
on past period profits from firms (i) and banks (z). Total taxes Tk,t
are then equal to: Tk,t =

Hk X h,yh,t \>0

τk,t yh,t +

Ik X

τk,t πi,t−1 +

i,π ∗ \>0

Zk X

τk,t πz,t−1

32) 
z,π\>0

Public spending Gk,t takes the form of a lump-sum, equally-distributed
monetary transfer to households (Gk,t /H). The government balance is the
difference between revenues from taxes and government spending,
including interests paid on bonds. When negative, the government runs a
deficit DEFk,t . In the opposite case the government attains a budget
surplus SUk,t−1 . Possible budget surpluses are set aside to fund public
expenditure in the next periods, thereby reducing the quantity of bonds
to be issued. The government determines in each period the level of
public spending (Gk,t ) and the tax rate (τk,t ) following an adaptive
scheme, based on the discrepancy between desired and past levels of
public expenditure on the one hand, and expected and admissible levels
of public deficit on the other hand. The desired level of public
expenditure GD k,t is simply defined as the initial (exogenously set)
real value of public spending G, adjusted for the country average level
of prices Pk,t and average productivity Φk,t , so to ensure that the
dimension of GD k,t remains roughly stable compared to aggregate GDP: =
P Φ G. In addition, governments are committed to make efforts not to
exceed a deficit-toGD k,t k,t k,t GDP threshold indicated by dmax .
Public expenditure and tax rates are then revised according to the
following scheme:13 ( Gk,t = Gk,t−1 (1 − U \[0, δ\]) if dk,t−1 ≥ d
τk,t+1 = τk,t (1 + U \[0, δ\]) ( Gk,t = Gk,t−1 if dk,t−1 ≥ dmax and GD
k,t \> Gk,t−1 : τk,t+1 = τk,t (1 + U \[0, δ\]) ( Gk,t = Gk,t−1 (1 − U
\[0, δ\]) if dk,t−1 \< dmax and GD k,t ≤ Gk,t−1 : τk,t+1 = τk,t (1 − U
\[0, δ\]) ( Gk,t = Gk,t−1 (1 + U \[0, δ\]) if dk,t−1 \< dmax and GD k,t
\> Gk,t−1 : τk,t+1 = τk,t max

and GD k,t ≤ Gk,t−1 :

33) 
34) 
35) 
36) 
In each period, national governments repay bonds previously issued and
pay interests to bond holders. The interest rate on bonds is set as a
premium on the Central Bank discount rate depending on the debt-to-GDP
ratio of the country: rbk,t = χBk,t /Yk,t + rt

37) 
Newly issued bonds (for a total value of Bk,t ) are split into 100
tranches (bk,t = Bk,t /100) and put on the bond market where they are
purchased by commercial banks, and by the national Central Bank for the
possible residual part. 13 To avoid unreasonable high or low values, the
tax rate is bound to vary within the range {τ min , τmax }, whereas &#8;
Gk,t is bound between a minimum and maximum share of GDP: gmin Yk,t ,
gmax Yk,t .



Finally, national governments step in to guarantee depositors in
case of a domestic bank default. For this sake, the governments issue an
additional batch of bonds, which is directly purchased by the Central
Bank, and uses the liquidity collected to reimburse households and firms
who lost their deposits in the default. 2.1.6

Firms’ and banks’ endogenous entry and exit

Part of households’ savings is invested in the creation of new firms and
new banks (see section 2.1.1). The new entrant will be a bank when
either the ratio between banks’ and firms’ number, or the ratio between
banks’ and firms’ total net worth are below a given percentage η.
Otherwise, the new entrant will be a firm. The new firm will be a
tradable with probability cT , or a non tradable with probability 1 − cT
. In this way we aim to avoid excessive imbalances in the relative
dimension of the banking, tradable, and nontradable sectors. The new
organization samples its initial equity level in the range between the
net worth of the smallest and larger incumbents: the first h investors
required to collect this level of funds become its shareholders. If
funds invested by households are lower than the randomly sampled initial
net worth, no firm (bank) is created and funds originally allocated by
households to equity investment are deposited at banks, being available
to fund households’ investment in the next period. New firms’ initial
productivity (φ), price (pi,t ), and offered wage (wi,t ) are also
sampled within a range going from the lowest to the highest values of
incumbent firms in the sector. Sales expectations e ) are the maximum
between the random value sampled in the range between the lowest and
highest (qi,t Ai,t φi,t , this latter representing the amount of goods
feasibly producible, values of incumbents and wi,t given the initial
values of equity, wage, and productivity of the new firm. Firms whose
net worth is below a threshold level, defined as the wage they offer to
workers Ft = wi,t , default. Similarly, banks having a net-worth below
the national average wage default.14 A default by a firm implies a non
performing loan for creditors. The larger the bad debt suffered by
banks, the worse the effect on their balance sheet. In the rare case of
a default by a bank the government steps-in and issues additional bonds
to reimburse depositors.

## 2.2 Simulation scheduling and simulations setup


The sequence of events taking place within each period of the
simulations is the same presented in Caiani et al. (2017b): 1. Firms
determine their desired production, their labor demand, the price of
their output, the wage offered, and their desired R\&D investment. 2.
Firms interact with banks on the credit market and possibly receive
loans. Banks possibly ask cash advances to the Central Bank to satisfy
the mandatory liquidity ratio. 3. Firms interact with workers on the
labor market. 4. Workers are paid and employed to produce firms’ output
and to perform R\&D. Dividends generated in the previous period are
distributed to equity holders, summing up to their current income. 5.
Governments calculate revenues from taxes (on past period profits and
current period households’ income), determine the level of public
spending and the tax rate for the next period, repay bonds plus
interests to bond holders, and determine the quantity of bonds to be
issued. 6. Bonds are put on the bond market where commercial banks buy
it. The possible residual part is purchased by national Central Banks.
7. After having paid taxes and received the tax-exempt monetary transfer
from the government, households compute their demand for consumption
goods and interact with tradable and nontradable firms on the
corresponding good markets. 14 In this way we remove from the simulation
not only firms having a negative net-worth, but also those firms having

such a tiny positive net-worth that their contribution to the dynamics
of the model is negligible, thus representing just a computational
burden.



8. Firms and banks compute their profits and update their net worth
and shareholders’ equity accordingly. Taxes and dividends to be paid in
the next period to the government and to equity holders respectively are
then computed. 9. Defaulted firms and banks exit the market. Households
equity investment takes place and, if enough financial resources are
collected, new firms and banks are created. The calibration of the model
largely resembles that employed in Caiani et al. (2017b). Only a few
parameter values have been changed, partly to improve the realism of our
simulations, but mostly as a consequence of the amendments made to the
wage revision rules of workers (equation 1 and firms (equation 15).15
Table 2 in the appendix displays the value of the parameters employed in
the baseline specification, which were the result of a combination of
empirically grounded calibration and tentative investigation of the
parameter space: with this configuration the model yields a quite stable
dynamics over the timespan considered and the properties of key economic
variables - such as real GDP and productivity growth rates, inflation
rates, unemployment rates, debt-to-GDP ratios, exports and imports, etc.
- are economically reasonable and broadly resembles the properties of
their empirical counterparts. Table 3 in the appendix, which presents a
battery of statistics on key economic variables generated by the model
and compares them with data for the European Monetary Union, highlights
that our artificial Monetary Union is broadly comparable to the EMU
(last column) under many respects. In addition, before executing the
experiments described in the next sections we followed the same
procedure presented in Caiani et al. (2017c) - in line with the
well-established macro AB validation routine started with Dosi et
al. (2010) - verifying the consistency between the properties of the
times series generated by the model and a selection of key stylized
facts concerning: • the relative volatility of real GDP, consumption,
investment, unemployment, exports and imports; • the cyclicality of
consumption, exports, imports, public spending and public spending over
GDP, and unemployment (Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé, 2017); • the
differential between inflation and labor productivity growth in the
tradable and non-tradable sectors (De Gregorio et al., 1993; Bernard and
Jensen, 1999; Bernard et al., 2003, 2007); • the distribution of firm
and bank size(Stanley et al., 1995); • the persistency of countries real
GDP and labor productivity differentials. Finally, the model employs a
simple and intuitive procedure to carry out the task of setting up in a
Stock Flow Consistent manner the initial values of stocks and flows for
individual agents and for the economy as a whole, so to respect
Copeland’s quadruple entry principle (Copeland, 1949; Godley and
Lavoie, 2007). The rationale of this procedure, explained in detailed in
Caiani et al. (2017c), is that instead of setting these initial values
exogenously, we let them to be progressively created and accumulated in
the initial phase of the simulation. To be more precise, we start from a
situation where there are no stocks in the economy, and no firms and
banks as well. Following a procedure inspired by the ‘SIM’ model
presented in Godley and Lavoie (2007), the initialization phase is then
triggered by public spending, as the government makes an initial
transfer to resident households. National Central Banks buy government
bonds, thereby injecting legal currency in the economic system. This
money is saved by households (since there are initially no goods to
purchase) and invested in the creation of new firms which start to
employ workers, produce goods which are then sold to households, and
invest in R\&D. The government then starts to collect taxes on income
and profits. As firms’ number increases also banks are created.
Households and firms then deposit their legal currency at these newly
created banks. Banks start to grant credit to firms so that the system
starts to display both legal and private money. Banks start to purchase
bonds. With rising tax revenues and GDP increasing - as more and more
firms are in business - the public debt-to-GDP ratio rapidly declines
and stabilizes to reasonable levels. International flows of goods,
deposits and reserves between countries arise. Supranational credit-debt
relationships, generating international flows of interests also arise
since commercial banks grant loans also to foreign firms and purchase
public debt bonds of foreign countries. Defaults and new entries tend to
offset each other and firms’ and banks’ number stabilizes. Firms and
countries become more and more heterogeneous as a consequence of
path-dependent processes triggered by their past 15 See section 2.1.1
for a discussion of these refinements.



Table 1: Experiment Design: Alternative Wage Growth Regimes

υ e−υut−1 at ut−1 = 10%

Wage Inflation 0.512 1.054 95% 90%

Baseline 1.625 85%

Wage Compression 2.231 2.877 85% 75%

R\&D and past economic performance. Eventually, the model progressively
exits its transition phase and starts to display stable properties.
After the model stabilizes, its consistency with empirical stylized
facts can be checked, as we explained here above, and policy experiments
can be carried out: the next section is dedicated to their analysis.

## 3 Results


## 3.1 Experiment Design


In the next sub-sections we present and discuss the results of our
simulation experiments designed to study the impact of alternative wage
growth patterns on the economic performance of individual countries, and
of the Monetary Union as a whole. For convenience, we recall hereunder
the two adaptive heuristics employed by workers and firms to revise
their reservation and offered wage respectively. ( + wh,t−1 (1 + U \[0,
δ\]), if lS − lh,t−1 = 0 with P r(wh,t ) = υH e−υut−1 wh,t = − S wh,t−1
(1 − U \[0, δ\]), if l − lh,t−1 \> 0 with P r(wh,t ) = 1 − υH e−υut−1 (
+ D wi,t−1 (1 + U \[0, δ\]), if li,t−1 − li,t−1 \> 0 with P r(wi,t ) =
υF e−υut−1 wi,t = − D wi,t−1 (1 − U \[0, δ\]), if li,t−1 − li,t−1 = 0
with P r(wi,t ) = 1 − υF e−υut−1 The two pairs of rules highlight that
the direction of the possible revision undertaken by workers and firms
depends on an agent-specific condition: workers compare the quantity of
labor sold with the quantity supplied, whereas firms compare the
quantity purchased with the quantity demanded. However, the revision
only occurs with a probability depending on the aggregate rate of
unemployment, thus reflecting the endogeneity of workers’ and firms’
bargaining power: upward revisions are less likely when unemployment is
high, convincing workers to adopt a more cautious behavior, while they
become more likely if unemployment is low, inducing workers to increase
their wage claims. Similarly, on the other side of the labor market
employers know that workers are more willing to accept lower wages when
they are overabundant, and that wages should instead rise to make vacant
position more attractive to workers when these latter are a scarce
resource. This probability depends on the exponential function e−υut−1
and the value set for the parameter υ: a higher υ reduces the
probability of rising wages and increases the probability of wage
reductions. In a policy perspective, a reduction of υ represents a
parsimonious and intuitive way to mimic the effect of institutional
reforms aiming to strengthen workers’ bargaining power, while an
increase of the parameter shifts the bargaining power in favor of
employers. Wage expansionary scenarios thus take the form of a decrease
of υ occurring at period 500. An increase at period 500 of υ instead is
assumed to analyze the consequences of a slowdown in wages. Table 1
displays all the values of υ employed in the simulation experiments, and
the corresponding values assumed by the exponential term e−υut−1 at a
past level of unemployment equal to 10%. Table 1 shows that values of υ
were set so that the value attained by e−υut at ut−1 = 10% changes by
five percentage points between two subsequent scenarios.16 For the sake
of providing an exhaustive analysis of the twofold role of wages in
driving the dynamics of the economic system, as they represent at the
same time a major source of nominal aggregate demand and a determinant
of firms’ international cost competitiveness, we perform several
different simulation experiments: section 3.2 considers the case of a
sharp change in the wage growth pattern favoring workers in a single
randomly-chosen country. Section 3.3 considers the opposite scenario,
that 16 This factor is then scaled by the paramaters υ H and υF for
housholds and firms respectively. The rationale of these scaling
paramaters has been already discussed in section 2.1.1.



is a sharp increase of υ in a single randomly-chosen country.17
Section 3.4 investigates the effect of alternative wage growth patterns
under the assumption that all Union member countries follow the same
strategy towards wages. Section 3.5 enriches the analysis checking in
which measure the results discussed in section 3.4 are affected by a
change in the elasticity of consumers’ demand to prices, or by a
different number of countries. For each of the simulation experiments
presented 50 Monte Carlo simulations have been run. The calibration have
been made so that each period ideally represent a quarter. Simulations
last 1000 periods.

## 3.2 Experiment: wage acceleration in one randomly-chosen country


In this sub-section we consider the effects of a reduction of the
parameter υ from 1.625 to 0.512 occurring in a randomly sampled country
at period 500. As table 1 shows, this shock increases the value assumed
by e−υut−1 from 85% to 95% at an unemployment rate of 10% so that the
probability of an upward revision at that level of unemployment (and
provided that the agent-specific condition is statisfied) increases by
υH · 10% percentage points for housholds and υF · 10% percentage points
for firms, whereas the probability of a downward revisision decreses by
the same amount. Due to space constraints, we refer to the case of a
Monetary Union composed of K = 5 countries. Results are qualitatively
robust under scenarios with 2 and 10 countries. This experiment is
particularly useful since it allows to highlight the main processes
triggered by the wage growth regime switch on both the demand and supply
sides of the economy: on the demand side, wages exert a direct effect on
the domestic demand for non-tradable and tradable goods, part of the
latter taking the form of imports from abroad. On the supply side, wages
concur to determine firms’ unit costs of production, thereby affecting
their profit margins and the international competitiveness of tradable
firms. The evolution of wages, unit costs, and profit margins influences
the process of Schumpeterian competition between firms by shaping a more
or less selective competitive environment which steers the evolution of
the industry towards more or less concentrated market structures. In
turn, the number and average dimension of firms affect the productivity
dynamics, R\&D investment and technological progress. Figures in panel 2
display the dynamics of key economic variables. As a consequence of the
acceleration in wage growth occurring in period 500, firms’ unit costs
of production, measured by wages/productivity, initially rise (right
side on the top of panel 2). Since prices are adaptive, the rise of unit
costs is not perfectly offset by a proportional increase in prices. On
the one hand this implies that workers’ real purchasing power increases,
stimulating real demand for both tradable and nontadable goods. However,
it also implies that the profit margin of firms shrinks as the realized
markup is lower (right side on the fourth line of panel 2). Less
productive firms may see their profit margin completely vanishing, or
being forced to apply very high prices to avoid selling at a loss, as
unit costs are increasing. However, this reduces the attractiveness of
their output to consumers. Eventually, less productive firms will not
survive under this scenario. Furthermore, as domestic demand grows, it
stimulates a significant rise in the price of non-tradable goods which
are sheltered from international competition, eroding the initial
increase in the purchasing power of workers (right side on the second
line of panel 2). Also firms producing for the tradable market, which
now have less room to adapt prices due to the higher unit labor costs,
will have on average higher prices compared to their foreign
competitors, even though the international competition prevent them to
rise prices too much (left side on the third of panel 2): again, less
productive firms will either see their profit margin squeezed by the
rise of wages, or hit the unit-cost lower bound of prices being forced
to rise prices at the cost of seeing their market share shrinking. Less
productive firms, which are less equipped to deal with the changed
economic environment, thus tend to run out of business; exports of the
country drop and imports rise due to an income effect, because higher
wages increase total demand, including demand for imports, as well as to
a substitution effect, because foreign tradables are slightly cheaper
than those domestically produced. This can be appreciated by looking at
the Net Foreign Asset Position (center figure in the third line of panel
2) of the country which significantly worsens, falling into a negative
territory meaning that the country has become a net debtor. All in all,
the positive income effect on the non-tradable sector seems to be
outweighed by the negative external effect just outlined and by the
increasing number of defaults by less productive firms which reduces the
number of firms in business in both sectors (last two figures in panel
2). 17 For space reasons in these two sections we display just the
experiments performed using the extreme values of υ in table 1. Results
are similar, though milder, for intermediate values.



Policy

Real Y

Baseline

Policy

Unemployment

Baseline

●

●

Policy

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●


2000 ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●


● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●



● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●


●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

Wage/Productivity

Baseline ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●





















●


900 ●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

Policy

Productivity NT

Baseline

Policy

●

●

●

●

●

Productivity T

Baseline

●

Policy

Average Price NT

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●


● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●


Policy


●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●





● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●


Average Price T

Baseline

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●


●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●


Policy

●

●



● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●


Foreign Asset Position

Baseline

●

● ● ●


● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●


Policy

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●


● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●


● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●


● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●


●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●


●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


5 ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●


●

● ●


● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●





Public Debt/Y

Baseline

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●


●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

−1

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●





●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●


●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●


●

●

●


●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●


● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

−3

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

−2

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●


● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●


●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●












●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

Baseline

Innovation Success

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●


●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

● ●

●

●



●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

Profit Margin NT

Baseline ●

●

●

● ●

Policy

● ●


● ●


● ●

●

●

●


●



Policy

●

●

●

●


●

●

●


Baseline

●

●

Average R\&D/Y

●

Policy

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●















●




●

●




●

●

●





●

● ●

Profit Margin T

Policy

●

●

●

●

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●


● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

700 ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

600 ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


N° Firm T

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●


●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

Policy

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

N° Firm NT

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●


●

●


●

●


0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●


Baseline


Policy







●

●

●

●

●

●

●






●

●

Figure 2: Wage acceleration in one randomly-chosen country. Lines
represent average trend across Monte Carlo simulations for each
variable. Dashed lines are confidence intervals. The black line refers
to the average of the K − 1 countries which stick to the baseline
configuration. The red line refers to the randomly-sampled country where
the wage growth pattern is enhanced. Top: Real GDP (left), Unemployment
(center), Average Wage/ Average Productivity (right). Second row:
Average Productivity in the non-tradable sector (left), Average
Productivity in the tradable sector (center), Average Prices in the
non-tradable sector (right). Third row: Average Prices in the tradable
sector (left), Foreign Asset Position /GDP (center), Public Debt/GDP
(right). Fourth row: Average R\&D Investment by individual firms as
percentage of GDP (left), Number of Innovations achieved (center),
Profit Margin in the tradable sector (right). Fifth line: Profit Margin
in the non-tradable sector (left), Number of Firms in the non-tradable
sector (center), Number of Firms in the tradable sector. Average
variables referring to firms are weighted for firms’ market shares.



Therefore, the economy initially experiences a slowdown of real GDP
dynamics and a significant fall in employment levels (first and second
figure in panel 2, respectively). As a consequence of the fall in tax
revenues, public Debt-to-GDP ratio surges (right side of the third line
of panel 2). However, the same short-run tendencies discussed above
trigger the conditions which allow to revert or stabilize them in the
medium and long-run, preventing the system from collapsing. In
particular, two processes are relevant in this respect: first, the rise
of unemployment observed in the country where the wage regime shift
occurs partially counteracts the wage inflationary tendency. Secondly,
the rise of unit costs of production exacerbates firms’ selection and
Schumpeterian competition processes, forcing less productive firms to
leave the market and thus exerting a direct positive impact on the
average level of productivity. The market structure emerging from this
process is more concentrated compared to the Union average and to the
baseline scenario, being characterized by fewer firms of bigger
dimension and with greater productivity. More productive firms, being no
longer forced to split the take with less productive competitors, can
grow in dimension. This, in turn, implies that resources devoted by
firms to R\&D are now more efficiently allocated: R\&D investment per
firm rises, as the figure on the left side of the fourth line in panel 2
displays. Since R\&D is now concentrated on fewer big firms, rather than
be distributed across many small ones, R\&D tends to be more effective
and the number of innovations achieved increases (second figure in the
fourth line of panel 2). As a consequence, labor productivity tends to
grow faster in the random country where wages are allowed to grow faster
(first and second figure in the second line of panel 2). Eventually, the
rise of productivity is such to outweigh the rise of wages, thereby
reducing unit labor costs of production (right side on the top of panel
2). The rise in productivity levels, however, tends to reduce the
quantity of labor required for production purposes, contributing to
keeping unemployment high. Furthermore, the fall of unit costs of
production allowed by the enhanced technological progress dynamics tends
to translate into grater profit margins (right side of the fourth line
of panel 2) rather than in price reductions. This explains why the
dynamics of the Net Foreign Asset Position is stabilized but not
reverted, as the country is now characterized by a balanced (on average)
current account, while continuing to roll-over the debt cumulated in the
aftermath of the regime switch. Similarly, also the dynamics of public
debt appears to fluctuate around stable levels in the medium and long
run. Finally, the market structure tends to stabilize (last two figures
in 2) with core firms dominating the market thanks to their dimension
and technological advantage which guarantees greater profit margins,
giving them the flexibility required to face the possible entry of new
competitors. Eventually, the rise of labor productivity allows real GDP
to recover and catching up with (or even overtaking) other countries, as
displayed by the first figure in panel 2. This observation is
particularly interesting because it shows that, as a consequence of the
dynamic processes triggered on both the demand and supply sides of the
economy by the wage inflationary process, the system ends up displaying
hysteresis in the dynamics of unemployment, but not in that of real GDP.

## 3.3 Experiment: wage compression in one randomly-chosen country


This sub-section discusses the effects of a change in the parameter υ in
the opposite direction with respect to section 3.2, from 1.625 to 2.876,
which corresponds to a reduction of e−υut−1 from 85% to 75% at an
unemployment rate of 10%. Hence, we are now investigating the effects of
a slowdown in wages growth pattern which starts from period 500. Also in
this case, we present results obtained with five countries, whose
robustness have been nonetheless confirmed by simulation experiments
performed under scenarios with 2 and 10 countries. The panel 3 presents
the same selection of variables discussed in the previous section. As in
the former case, we can distinguish between short and medium-long term
effects. Much of the dynamics emerging from this simulation experiment
can be explained by making reference to the same processes analyzed
before, though they now work in the opposite direction. A relative
slowdown in the growth of wages has the immediate effect of reducing
unit labor costs (right side on the top of panel 3) and increasing
profit margins (right side on the bottom of panel 3). However, since
prices are set in an adaptive way, it takes some time before the
reduction of unit costs translates in an actual reduction of prices. In
the very first periods after period 500, the slowdown in wages
translates in a reduction of aggregate demand and GDP, accompanied by a
slight increase of unemployment (first and second figures in panel 3).
However, as prices adapt, the enhanced competitiveness of domestic
tradable firms and the fall of imports due to the income effect allow
the country to register current account surpluses. The external position
of the country improves as testified by its Net Foreign Asset Position,
since



Policy

Real Y

Baseline

Policy

Unemployment

Baseline

Policy ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Wage/Productivity

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●








● ●










●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●



● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●



● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●


●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●






●

● ●

●

●

800 ●


● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

Policy

Productivity NT

Baseline

Policy

Productivity T

Baseline

Policy

Average Price NT

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●


● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●


5 ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●



● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●



●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●


● ● ● ● ●

●


● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●











Average Price T

Baseline


Policy


Policy








Foreign Asset Position

Baseline


Policy






Public Debt/Y

Baseline

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●



●

●

● ●

●

● ●

20 ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●




●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

−1

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●


●


●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

−3

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

−2

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●


80 60 40

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●





















●

Policy

●

●

Average R\&D/Y

Baseline

Policy

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

Innovation Success

Baseline

● ●

●

●

●

Policy

Profit Margin NT

Baseline ●

●

●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●


● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●


0.00014 0.00016 0.00018 0.00020

●




●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

700 ●

●

●

●

●

●

800 ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

900 ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●



●

●

●

●

●


●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●




●

●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

Policy

Baseline

●

●

N° Firm NT

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●




●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

400 ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●


●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●


●


●

● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

N° Firm T ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

Baseline

●

●

●

● ●

Policy

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●


●









●


Profit Margin T

Baseline



Policy

●

●









●

Figure 3: Wage moderation in one randomly-chosen country. Lines
represent average trend across Monte Carlo simulations for each
variable. Dashed lines are confidence intervals. The black line refers
to the average of the K − 1 countries which stick to the baseline
configuration. The red line refers to the randomly-sampled country where
the wage growth pattern is dampened. Top: Real GDP (left), Unemployment
(center), Average Wage/ Average Productivity (right). Second row:
Average Productivity in the non-tradable sector (left), Average
Productivity in the tradable sector (center), Average Prices in the
non-tradable sector (right). Third row: Average Prices in the tradable
sector (left), Foreign Asset Position /GDP (center), Public Debt/GDP
(right). Fourth row: Average R\&D Investment by individual firms as
percentage of GDP (left), Number of Innovations achieved (center),
Profit Margin in the tradable sector (right). Fifth line: Profit Margin
in the non-tradable sector (left), Number of Firms in the non-tradable
sector (center), Number of Firms in the tradable sector. Average
variables referring to firms are weighted for firms’ market shares.



the country has been accumulating funds that are then re-invested
abroad, becoming a net creditor (second figure of the third line of
panel 3). This positive external effect tends to offset the depressing
effects on domestic demand, allowing real GDP to recover and
unemployment to drop. However, the milder pressure of wages on firms’
profit margins allows even those characterized by lower productivity
levels, that would have otherwise gone bankrupt, to survive. This is
particularly true for firms operating in the non-tradable sector, which
are sheltered from international competition. The number of firms tends
to increase in the country where the wage moderation strategy is pursued
and its industry converges towards a less concentrated structure
characterized by many small firms. R\&D investment, as a consequence,
ends up being dispersed across a myriad of small firms: the investment
in R\&D per firm drops and R\&D investment looses efficacy (left and
center figures in the fourth line of panel 3). Innovation dynamics and
labor productivity growth thus slowdown (left and center figures in the
second line of panel 3). This allows to keep unemployment low by
dampening the labor-saving effect of technological progress, but also
prevents real GDP growth from keeping the pace with other countries
(second and first figure on the top of 3, respectively). As far as
public finance is concerned, the positive effect on employment and the
inflow of funds thanks to foreign trade seem to balance the fall in GDP,
allowing public debt-to-GDP ratio to remain stable or even slightly
below the average values of other countries (third graph on the third
line of panel 3). Eventually the slowdown in labor productivity growth,
coupled with low unemployment levels which somewhat counteract wage
moderation, partially realign firms’ average profit margins to that of
other countries, contributing to stabilizing the number of firms in
business. However, while profit margins in the tradable sector remain
slightly above that of foreign competitors (left figure in the fifth
line of panel 3), because foreign demand sustains domestic tradable
firms’ sales (i.e. country’s exports) while their productivity gap with
foreign competitors remains tiny, profit margins of domestic
non-tradable firms end up being lower than in other countries (right
figure in the fourth line of panel 3) as a consequence of the severe
slowdown in labor productivity growth in that sector (left figure in the
second line of panel 3). While overall average unit costs of domestic
firms remain somehow lower than elsewhere, allowing the country to
maintain (or even slightly improve) its positive Net Foreign Asset
Position, unit costs in the non-tradable sector tend to be higher. This
also explains why prices in the domestic non-tradable sector are not
only higher than in the tradable, but also higher than in other
countries (third and second figure in the second line of panel 3).
Before moving to the next experiment it must be noticed that the plots
referring to the two experiments discussed above compare countries where
υ changes with the other K − 1 countries which, in the same simulations,
continue to stick to the baseline value of υ. However, one may wonder
what are the global effects at the Union level of the regime switch
occurring in a single country, compared to the baseline scenario where υ
did not change. Figures in panel 4 compare the Union global average
values for each variable in the baseline scenario with the Union
averages in the two scenarios where υ has been modified for a random
country. Interestingly, these figures highlight that a reduction of υ
produces a slight improvement of the Union average performance: real GDP
and labor productivity are slightly higher, while public debtto-GDP and
unemployment levels are lower. This suggests that a faster increase of
wages in a country tends to provide benefits to the rest of the Union,
whereas a slowdown in wage growth seems to result in a slacker average
economic performance at the global level. This observation rises an
important question: what would then if countries were able to coordinate
their wage strategies, that is if υ were changed in the same way and in
all countries simultaneously? The experiment discussed in the next
sub-section aims at investigating this possibility.

## 3.4 Experiment: alternative wage growth patterns in all country


In the previous sections we focused our attention on a change in the
wage growth regime occurring in individual countries, while the other
members of the Union stuck to the original wage regime. To provide a
more exhaustive analysis we now consider the case where the structural
break in the wage growth regime occurs in all countries at once. On the
one hand, deregulation of labor markets aiming to avoid excessive growth
of wages has been often proposed in the economic debate as the golden
rule to which every country should conform. This view has been discussed
in the introduction with particular reference to the Euro Crisis: the
Neoclassical interpretation, well represented by the thesis presented in
Sinn (2014a,b), contends that peripheral countries should deregulate
their labor markets in order to embrace the wage moderation



Real Y

Unemployment ●

●

●

Productivity

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●


● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●





Average Price


●

●

●

● ● ●




Public Debt/Y

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●


●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●


●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●



●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●


2000 ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●






Profit Margin

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●


● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●


● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ●

●


●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●



● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●







Figure 4: Wage acceleration vs wage moderation in one randomly-chosen
country: global effects on the Union. Lines represent average trend
across Monte Carlo simulations for each variable. Dashed lines are
confidence intervals. The black line refers to the average across all
countries in the baseline configuration. The red line refers to the
average across all countries corresponding to the experiment of wage
acceleration in one random country, the blue line refers to the average
across all countries in the experiment of wage moderation in one random
country. First row: Real GDP (left), Unemployment (center), Average
Productivity (right) in the non-tradable sector (left), Average
Productivity in the tradable sector (center), Average Prices in the
non-tradable sector (right). Second row: Average Prices (left), Public
Debt/GDP (center), Average Profit Margin (right). Average variables
referring to firms are weighted for firms’ market shares.

strategy that has been the key of core countries’ success. This analysis
was fiercely opposed by scholars - mainly, but not exclusively, in the
Keynesian tradition - who believe Germany has pursued a ‘beggar thy
neighbor’ strategy which could not work if generalized to all European
economies, advocating instead a coordinated strategy of wage increases
(see for example Flassbeck and Lapavitsas (2013); Stockhammer (2011);
Stockhammer and Sotiropoulos (2014); Onaran and Obst (2016)). This
debate provides the rationale for the simulation experiment presented in
this section which aims at comparing the effects of coordinated wage
strategies involving all the Union member countries. As usual, the wage
regime switch takes the form of a change occurring at period 500 in the
value of the parameter υ in workers’ and firms’ wage revision
strategies. More precisely, we conducted four different simulation
experiments employing the values presented in table 1, and we compare
them with each other and with the baseline scenario. For each scenario,
50 Monte Carlo repetitions have been carried out. For space and
explanatory reasons, in this section we refer to the case of a Monetary
Union composed of five countries. However, section 3.5 shows that
results are robust across simulation experiments conducted with 2, 5,
10, and 15 countries. Panel 5 presents the main results of the
simulation experiments performed. Given the objective of this test and
the fact that countries are now characterized by the same wage regime,
graphs display the average trends of variables across countries and
their confidence interval.18 The explanation of results provided in
sections 3.2 and 3.3 provides a useful conceptual map to interpret the
results of this section. The main difference is represented by the fact
that, when all countries follow a similar strategy towards wages, the
relative advantages and disadvantages associated to each type of policy
in terms of international competitiveness tend to be balanced out,
leaving the relative international position of the Union member
countries unaltered even after the wage regime switch occurs. In other
words, a change in the wage regime does not affect international trade
between countries as long as it occurs in a coordinated way: relative
unit costs of production remain unaltered because wages accelerate or
decelerate in the same proportion in different countries so that the
total demand for tradable goods, which varies due to the income effects
associated with different wage growth regimes, continues to be
distributed across countries as before. As a consequence, variation of
imports will be almost neutralized by a corresponding variation of
exports, and vice-versa. This implies that when the regime switch occurs
in all countries at once, the trade off arising from the twofold role of
wages as a source of domestic aggregate demand and as a determinant of
18 For this reason it now makes no sense to present the graph relative
to the external position of countries, such as

the Net Foreign Asset Position which is 0 by definition given that
Monetary Union represents a closed system. Also the figure of Average
Unit Costs measured as (average) wages divided by (average)
productivity, which in the previous experiments was employed to compare
the cost-competitiveness of countries following different wage
strategies, is now omitted given that countries are characterized by the
same wage regime.



Unemployment

Productivity NT


Real Y ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●



● ●









● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●




Average Price T ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●










Public Debt/Y ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ● ● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

200 ●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●


● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●


●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●




● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●


●

●

● ●


●

● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●


●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●


●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

N° Firms

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●


● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●


●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●


●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38

0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Profit Margin T

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Profit Margin NT

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Innovation Success ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●



●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●


●

●

●

●

● ●

●



● ●

●

●

●

●


●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

Average R\&D/Y

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●


● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●


● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●


5 ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●



● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●


25 20 15

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●


Average Price NT ● ● ● ● ●


Productivity T

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●


● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●


● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●


●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●


● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●


● ●

● ●

● ●

●


● ●

●

●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●



● ●

●

● ●

●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

●

● ● ●

● ●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●



● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●


8000 10000

● ● ●

●

●

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

● ● ●

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

● ● ● ● ●

●

● ● ●

●

● ●

●

● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●


● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●

● ● ●


● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●


Figure 5: Alternative Wage Growth Patterns in all countries. Lines are
Monte Carlo average of variables average trends across countries. Dashed
lines are confidence intervals. Black line: baseline scenario (υ =
1.625). Red line: wage acceleration with υ = 0.512. Orange line: wage
acceleration with υ = 1.054. Light blue line: wage moderation with υ =
2.231. Blue line: wage moderation with υ = 2.877. First row: Average
Real GDP, Average Unemployment, Average Productivity in the non-tradable
sector. Second row: Average Productivity in the tradable sector, Average
Prices in the non-tradable sector, Average Prices in the tradable
sector. Third row: Average Public Debt/GDP, Average R\&D Investment by
individual firms as percentage of GDP, Average Number of Innovations
achieved. Fourth row: Average Profit Margin in the tradable sector,
Average Profit Margin in the non-tradable sector, Average Number of
Firms.

the country’s external stance - through the effect they exert on imports
and firms’ international cost competitiveness (i.e exports) - is solved.
An enhanced wage dynamics not only favors the growth of domestic demand,
improving firms’ expectations and stimulating domestic firms to increase
their production levels, but the negative effect on the country’s
external position discussed for the singlecountry case is now
substituted by a positive feedback effects trough trade between
countries: since imports are rising everywhere, each country concurs to
foster the rise of the demand for tradable goods produced by other
countries. Conversely, a slowdown in wages growth depresses demand and
firms’ production levels, while also causing a generalized contraction
of international trade. At the same time, different wage growth patterns
continue to exert the same effects on the supply side of the economy
that we have highlighted in sections 3.2 and 3.3, influencing firms’
profit margins, the evolution of market structure, and hence the
dynamics of R\&D investment. Regimes which favor the growth of wages
reduce firms’ profit margins, in particular in the immediate aftermath
of the change in υ (left and center figure at the bottom of panel 5).
This exacerbates the Schumpeterian selection process fostering the exit
of less productive firms and a process of market concentration,
testified by the fall in firms’ number (last figure in panel 5) which
underpins the growth of more productive ones. As a consequence R\&D
investment tends to be concentrated on fewer and bigger firms so that
average investment per firm in productivity-enhancing activities rises,
improving innovation dynamics (respectively, center and right figures in
the third line of panel 5). This, in turn, enhances the dynamics of
labor productivity both in the non-tradable and tradable sectors (right
side on the top of panel 5 and left side in the second line) allowing
firms’ to partially balance the squeeze of their profit margin caused by
the rise of wages. Conversely, wage moderation allows less productive
firms to survive by exploiting the low cost of labor. However, in a
dynamic perspective, this leads to a market configuration characterized
by a multitude of smaller enterprises which contributes to make the
allocation of R\&D investment more 23


disperse and less effective. Eventually, innovation dynamics and
labor productivity growth start to slacken, partially offsetting the
effect of lower wages on unit costs and firms’ profit margins. As a
consequence of the enhanced demand and technological progress patterns,
real GDP is markedly higher in the wage inflationary scenarios, whereas
it is significantly lower in the wage moderation scenarios. The rise of
output in the expansionary cases is such that the labor saving effect
exerted by technological progress observed in the corresponding
experiments focusing on individual countries is eliminated: the center
figure on the top of panel 5 shows that unemployment is almost stable
across scenarios. Conversely, the advantage in terms of lower
unemployment brought by wage moderation regimes when applied to
individual countries disappears when wage moderation is generalized, as
a consequence of the fall in output levels. The dynamics of prices in
the non-tradable and tradable sectors (second and third plots in the
second line of panel 5) shows that part of workers additional purchasing
power originated by the rise of wages translates in higher inflation
rates, whereas wage moderation dampens the growth of prices. This,
together with the dynamics of real GDP and employment, concurs to
explain the reversal of the effect that alternative wage growth patterns
exert on public finance with respect to the case of a regime switch in
an individual country: wage inflationary scenarios tend to be associated
with lower, rather than higher, public debt-to-GDP ratios when the
regime switch occurs in a coordinated way, while the opposite holds when
countries ‘agree’ to dampen the growth of wages. The results of this
experiment seem to justify some skepticism about the effectiveness of
generalized wage moderation policies across countries, and the possible
mutual benefits originating instead from a coordinated policy of wage
increases. Our artificial Monetary Union thus appears to be
characterized by an overall ‘wage-led’ growth regime (Lavoie and
Stockhammer, 2012), where a distribution more favorable to workers
translates into an enhanced economic performance. The adoption of a
coordinated wage growth regime across member countries produces effects
not dissimilar from those we would obtain by applying the same strategy
in a closed economic system. Wage-led growth regimes, in turn, are often
a property displayed by relatively closed economic systems. Obviously,
the fact that our artificial Monetary Union abstracts from international
trade and financial flows with the rest of the world, contributes to
embed a bias in the analysis of the effects of coordinated wage growth
patterns just presented: countries characterized by a high degree of
international openness towards economies outside the Union, may still
suffer a slack in their international performance as a consequence of a
wage inflationary strategy, even if agreed between Union partners, while
they may find some advantage in pursuing a wage moderation strategy if
this improves their cost competitiveness vis-à-vis countries outside
the Union. While this argument do have some theoretical ground, two
empirical observations partially limit its scope: first, there is
general agreement that the Euro crisis has been mainly a story of
intra-EU imbalances between member countries, rather than with the rest
of the world. Second, given that much of the trade and financial
exchanges of European countries take place with other European partners,
the European Union as a whole can be considered as a relatively closed
system at a first approximation. The prevalence of a wage-led growth
regime emerging from these last simulation experiments seems to find a
confirmation, for the European Union, in several empirical studies, such
as Stockhammer (2011); Stockhammer and Sotiropoulos (2014); Stockhammer
et al. (2016); Stockhammer and Onaran (2013); Onaran and Galanis
(2012b); Onaran and Obst (2016)).

## 3.5 Wage Growth Patterns, Country Numerosity, and Consumers’ Demand

Elasticity to Prices

In this section we propose two extensive sensitivity experiments to
check the robustness of the results discussed in the previous section
(3.4). First, following Caiani et al. (2017a), we consider the case of a
Monetary Union composed by a different number of countries19 : by
increasing or decreasing the number of countries involved in the
simulations, the overall dimension of the Union and the extension of its
common market for tradables are modified as well. For this sensitivity
we consider a Monetary Union composed of 2, 5, 10, and 15 countries.
Secondly, we re-executed the experiment of section 3.4 under alternative
configurations in which consumers give less or more weight respectively
to the price and distance factors in the heuristics 19 As mentioned in
the text, a similar robustness check was also performed for the
experiments focusing on a wage regime switch in a single country.



employed to rank potential suppliers of goods. This heuristics
stated that supplier i is preferred to supplier j if: 1 Pt 1 Pt \> β
dβhi pit dhj pjt When consumer give more weight to price differentials
the elasticity of demand to price changes ends up being higher. If
instead they weigh more the distance between their random preferences
and the random variety offered by firms the elasticity of demand to
prices is lower. Formally, these alternative configurations can be
investigated by changing the value of the parameter β: the higher β, the
lower the elasticity of demand to prices. Five values are considered
besides the baseline value β = 2.0: 0.75, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 3.0 and 4.0.
Panels 6 and 7 display the results of these two sensitivity experiments
in a 3D format where the two horizontal axes display the combination of
the parameters {υ, K} or {υ, β} employed in each experiment, and the
vertical axes shows the corresponding Monte Carlo averages for a batch
of key variables.20 Each observation is represented as a filled square.
In addition, the plots also display the surfaces obtained by
interpolating these values with the Kriging interpolation method. This
technique, originally developed in Geostatistics, has been increasingly
adopted as a meta-modeling tool in Economics, in order to approximate
the behavior of ‘big’ models analyzed through computer experiments over
a given parameter space. In particular, the Kriging method appears to be
well suited for the carrying out of extensive sensitivity analysis of
Agent Based models, as advocated by Salle and Yildizoglu (2014) who
provide an exhaustive description of the technique and its possible
applications in this field of study.21 Figures in panel 6 display the
result of the experiments on the Union dimension which confirms the
robustness of the insights gained from the experiments presented in
section 3.4. These plots show that the impact of alternative wage growth
patterns, shaped by the values attributed to the parameter υ, is
homogeneous across scenarios characterized by a different number of
countries: regardless the number of countries involved in the simulation
real GDP growth, labor productivity, and inflation are remarkably higher
when countries pursue a coordinated wage inflationary strategy
(i.e. lower values of υ), and lower when they dampen the growth of
wages; the public debt-to-GDP ratio and firms’ profit margin instead are
lower for lower values of υ, and vice-versa. Finally, when all countries
are characterized by a coordinated wage growth regime, unemployment
tends to be unaffected as the effects on employment due to the change in
output growth trends tend to be counterbalanced by the effects due to
the change in labor productivity levels. Conversely, the number of
countries seems to play only a minor role on the evolution of the system
as the levels of variables plotted are in most cases stable across
scenarios characterized by the same value of υ. Figures in panel 7
display the results of the sensitivity experiments on consumers’ demand
elasticity. Once again, the robustness of the results discussed in
section 3.4 seems to be confirmed: lower values of υ are generally
associated with higher values or real GDP, labor productivity, and
prices, and lower public debt/GDP ratios and profit margins. However,
these results also show that the impact of alternative wage growth
patterns on the dynamics of the system is milder for higher value of β,
corresponding to a lower sensitivity of demand to prices, whereas their
effect becomes more pronounced for lower values of β, that is when
prices matter more for consumer consumption allocation decisions.
Furthermore, lower values of β are associated with greater values of
real GDP and labor productivity, lower profit margins, slightly higher
level of unemployment, and lower public debt-GDP ratios. This can be
principally explained by making reference to the Schumpeterian selection
process of firms. Increasing consumers’ demand sensitivity to price
differentials exacerbates price competition between firms, resulting in
lower prices and narrower profit margins. This, in turn, strengthens the
selection process of firms: a higher sensitivity of demand to prices
thus produces effects on the evolution of the tradable and nontradable
market structures similar to those observed in the case of a coordinated
acceleration of wages, favoring the disappearance of less productive
firms and a more effective allocation of R\&D investment which
reinforces innovation dynamics and labor productivity growth.
Nevertheless, they differ in that the enhanced price competitiveness
arising from lower values of β tends to dampen inflation, whereas the
wage inflation exert an upward pressure on prices. A higher sensitivity
of demand to prices thus reinforces the effects of faster wage growth
regimes on the supply side of the economy. On the contrary, a lower
sensitivity partially neutralizes the evolutionary effects of a faster
20 For each configuration tested, 50 Monte Carlo replications have been
executed, as usual. 21 A similar application of the method can be also
found in Caiani et al. (2017b).



wage growth by reducing price competition between firms, allowing
less productive firms to increase prices (under the pressure of rising
unit costs) whithout incurring in the risk of seeing their market shares
shrinking and being pushed out of the market. This explains why
scenarios with lower β are generally associated to greater real GDP and
labor productivity growth, and why regimes which favor the growth of
wages seem to be more effective when consumer have lower β. Finally, it
is interesting to notice that despite lower β and lower υ generally lead
to more concentrated market structures, surviving firms’ profit margins
in these scenarios are generally lower: in fact, the enhanced price
competition between firms and the upward pressure of wages on unit
costs, which jointly contribute to squeeze firms’ realized markups,
prevent surviving firms from exploiting excessive oligopolistic rents.









K

5 0.0022




up

on

sil







K









K














2.5 2.0


1.0 5


K


e-Average Unemployment mpg




















K


2.5 2.0





K


f-Average Public Debt/GDP


up sil on

up sil on

up

on

sil



mpg

mpg













rotated for graphical reasons to allow the most appropriate
visualization of results. The heading of each row of plots reports the
angle of rotation around the vertical axes.

Figure 6: Kriging-interpolated surfaces showing the effects of
(coordinated) alternative wage growth patterns in a Monetary Union with
2, 5, 10, and 15 countries. The plots have been




on


sil



mpg

c-Average Productivity (T and NT)

on

mpg


up

Second Row: angle of rotation around the vertical axes: 40◦




b-Average Prices (T and NT)

sil

d-Average Profit Margin (T and NT)





mpg

a-Average Real GDP Growth Rate

First Row: angle of rotation around the vertical axes: 220◦

Number of Countries Sensitivity

up







b

2 0.0022







up

on

sil










ta be



mpg










1.0 1.5

on

sil up



mpg




















sil up

on



e-Average Unemployment



mpg













ta be



2.5 2.0





ta be



f-Average Public Debt/GDP

up on

sil

ta

be

ta

be



mpg

mpg












to prices. The plots have been rotated for graphical reasons to allow
the most appropriate visualization of results. The heading of each row
of plots reports the angle of rotation around the vertical axes.

Figure 7: Kriging-interpolated surfaces showing the effects of
(coordinated) alternative wage growth patterns in a Monetary Union with
5 countries and with different demand elasticities


on



sil



up








c-Average Productivity (T and NT)

on

Second Row: angle of rotation around the vertical axes: 130◦ (left and
center) and 40◦ (right)

a et


mpg

b-Average Prices (T and NT)

sil

d-Average Profit Margin (T and NT)



a-Average Real GDP Growth

First Row: angle of rotation around the vertical axes: 220◦

Demand Elasticity Sensitivity

up

## 4 Summary and refinements


In this paper we have analyzed and compared the effects of changes in
the wage growth patterns of countries belonging to a Monetary Union.
Experiments have considered both the case in which these changes take
place in a single country and the case of a coordinated change occurring
in all member countries at the same time. Our results suggest that, in
all the scenarios explored, a change in the wage growth pattern not only
affects the dynamics of demand, but also produces non-trivial effects on
the supply side of the economy: in particular, scenarios more favorable
to the growth of wages seem to reinforce firms’ Schumpeterian selection
process, pushing out of the market marginal firms and favoring the
growth of more productive ones. This, in turn, produces positive effects
on R\&D investment allocation and firms’ innovative performance, thereby
fostering a faster growth of labor productivity. On the contrary, wage
moderation scenarios allow less productive firms to survive, leading to
market structure characterized by higher number of firms having smaller
dimension, thereby causing a more disperse and less effective allocation
of R\&D efforts. This effect is consistent with the theoretical insights
and empirical evidence provided by Kleinknecht (1998); Kleinknecht et
al. (2014); Vergeer and Kleinknecht (2014) who find that deregulation
aiming to dampen wage growth and to increase wage flexibility may be
advantageous in the short run but is detrimental from a Schumpeterian
perspective, as it discourages R\&D in product and process innovation,
allowing less innovative firms to survive by exploiting the lower labor
costs. When the wage regime switch occurs in a single country, both wage
moderation and wage inflation regimes seem to be characterized by a
trade off between the external and fiscal stance of the country on the
one hand, and the dynamics of other important macroeconomic indicators
on the other: wage expansions are accompanied by a worsening of the
country external position, an increase of public debtto-GDP ratio and a
higher level of unemployment, but they also display a faster labor
productivity growth which allow real GDP to recover relatively to other
countries which were not hit by the wage regime switch. Conversely, wage
moderation in a single country allows to lower unemployment, and to
improve the Net Foreign Asset Position of the country and the fiscal
stance of the government, but also causes a slowdown in the labor
productivity dynamics which tends to weaken real GDP growth in the long
run. On the contrary, this trade-off fades out when the change in the
wage growth patterns occurs in a simultaneous and coordinated way in all
members countries, thereby leaving their relative competitive position
unaltered. In this case, a coordinated wage inflationary strategy seems
capable of improving real GDP growth, innovation dynamics and labor
productivity growth, public debt/GDP levels, while almost not affecting
unemployment levels. This results, being consistent with the
predominance of a wage-led growth regime in the Monetary Union, thus
seems to make a case for a coordinated policy of wage increases across
core and peripheral country as a possible way out of the recession which
hit European economies after the global financial turmoil and the Euro
crisis. The robustness of these results has been checked with respect to
several different specifications of the number of countries in the
Union, which determines the size of the Union itself and of its common
market for tradabeles relatively to national economies. In the last
section we presented the result of this sensitivity experiment for the
case of a coordinated wage regime switch. Finally, we also analyzed the
impact of coordinated wage regime switches in relation to different
characterizations of consumers’ demand sensitivity to price
differentials: results suggest that a higher sensitivity to prices
determines on the process of selection of firms effects similar to those
observed in the scenarios where wages are allowed to grow faster, though
exerting on opposite pressure on the level of prices. Therefore, the
efficacy of wage inflationary regimes seems to be reinforced when
consumers give more importance to price differentials, and dampened in
the opposite case. Despite the robustness of the results presented in
this paper, we are well aware that some caution is advisable given the
simplified nature of the model. First, one may wonder how a different
specification of the R\&D investment may affect the results of the
model. For this sake we have conducted a preliminary investigation by
considering an alternative specification of R\&D investment, defined as
a share of expected sales rather than a share of the planned wage
bill.22 This change does not seem to affect the result discussed in the
paper in any significant way. 22 The rationale behind these two
specifications of firms’ R\&D investment has to be found in the
EvolutionaryNeoschumpeterian empirical and modeling literature which has
highlighted the relative stability of firms’ and sectors’ R\&D intensity
over time.



Furthermore, the model focuses on incremental patterns of
innovation resulting in a disembodied technological progress which
progressively increases labor productivity. However, it would be worth
exploring alternative characterizations of technological progress,
considering for example a wave of radical innovations, or technological
progress embodied in new capital vintages. Finally, a major limit of the
model in its current version is the still simplified character of the
financial side which completely neglects cross-border equity investment
by households, and presents simplified, almost-random, matching
procedures on the international credit and bond markets. As a
consequence, the role of financial factors is somehow underestimated
compared to the role of traderelated factors. In future refinements of
the model efforts will then be dedicated to improve these aspects in
order to give a better account of international credit and financial
investment flows which, as discussed in the section 1.1, have played a
crucial role in driving the evolution and mutual relationships of
European economies, with strong implications for the resilience of the
EMU.



References Baldwin, R., Beck, T., Bnassy-Qur, A., Blanchard, O.,
Corsetti, G., de Grauwe, P. den Haan, W., Giavazzi, F., Gros, D.,
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Micossi, S., Papaioannou, E., Pesenti, P.,
Pissarides, C., Tabellini, G., , and Weder di Mauro, B. (2015).
Rebooting the eurozone: Step 1 agreeing a crisis narrative. Centre for
Economic Policy Research Policy Insight Series, 85:15. Bernard, A. B.,
Eaton, J. J., Jensen, B. J., and Kortum, S. (2003). Plants and
productivity in international trade. American Economic Review,
93-4:1268–1290. Bernard, A. B., Jensen, B. J., Redding, S. J., and
Schott, P. K. (2007). Firms in international trade. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21-3:105–130. Bernard, A. B. and Jensen, J. B. (1999).
Exceptional exporter performance: cause, effect, or both? Journal of
International Economics, 47-1:1–25. Blanchard, O. (2007). Adjustment
within the euro. the difficult case of portugal. Portuguese Economic
Journal, 6-1:1–21. Caiani, A., Catullo, E., and Gallegati, M. (2017a).
The effects of fiscal targets in a monetary union: a multi-country agent
based-stock flow consistent model. Industrial and Corporate Change,
forthcoming:–. Caiani, A., Godin, A., Caverzasi, E., Gallegati, M.,
Kinsella, S., and Stiglitz, J. E. (2016). Agent Based-Stock Flow
Consistent macroeconomics: Towards a benchmark model. Journal of
Economic Dynamics & Control, 69:375–408. Caiani, A., Russo, A., and
Gallegati, M. (2017b). Are higher wages good for business? an assessment
under alternative innovation and investment scenarios. Available aton
SSRN, -:25. Caiani, A., Russo, A., and Gallegati, M. (2017c). Does
inequality hamper innovation and growth? Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, (forthcoming):39. Centre, E. P. S. (2015). The euro plus
pact. how integration into the eu framework can give new momentum for
structural reforms in the euro area. Technical Report 3, Eurpean
Commission. Chen, R., G.M., M.-F., and Tressel, T. (2012). External
imbalances in the euro area. IMF Working Paper Series, 12-236:51.
Christodoulopoulou, S. and Tkacevs, O. (2016). Measuring the
effectiveness of cost and price competitiveness in external rebalancing
of euro area countries: What do alternative hcis tell us? Empirica,
43:487–531. Copeland, M. A. (1949). Social Accounting for Moneyflows.
The Accounting Review, 24(3):pp. 254–264. De Gregorio, J., Giovannini,
A., and Wolf, H. (1993). International evidence on tradable and
nontradable inflation. NBER Working Paper Series, 4438:–. Deissenberg,
C., Van Der Hoog, S., and Dawid, H. (2008). Eurace: A massively parallel
agent-based model of the european economy. Applied Mathematics and
Computation, 204-2:541–552. Diaz Sanchez, J. and Varoudakis, A. (2013).
Growth and competitiveness as factors of eurozone external imbalances :
Evidence and policy implications. policy research working paper;no.
6732. world bank, washington,. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Series, 6732:33. Dosi, G., Fagiolo, G., and Roventini, A. (2010).
Schumpeter Meeting Keynes: A Policy-Friendly Model of Endogenous Growth
and Business Cycles. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
34(9):1748–1767. Dosi, G., Roventini, A., and Russo, A. (2017).
Endogenous growth and global divergence in a multicountry agent-based
model. LEM Working Paper Series, 2017/32:34. Flassbeck, H. and
Lapavitsas, C. (2013). The systemic crisis of the euro.true causes and
effective therapies. Rosa Luxemburg Stiftung Studien, -:–. Gabrisch, H.
and Staehr, K. (2014). The euro plus pact. cost competitiveness and
external capital flows in the eu countries. European Central Bank
Working Paper Series, 1650:34. Gaulier, G. and Vicard, V. (272012).
Current account imbalances in the euro area: competitiveness or demand
shock? Quarterly selection of articles - Bulletin de la Banque de
France, 27:5–26. Gerali, A., Neri, S., Sessa, L., and Signoretti, F.
(2010). Credit and banking in a dsge model of the euro area. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 42:107–141.



Godley, W. and Lavoie, M. (2007). Monetary Economics An Integrated
Approach to Credit, Money, Income, Production and Wealth. Palgrave
MacMillan, New York. Graziani, A. (2003). The Monetary Theory of
Production. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. Hall, P. (2012). The
economics and politics of the euro crisis. German Politics,
21-4:355–371. Hobza, A. and Zeugner, S. (2014). Current accounts and
financial flows in the euro area. Journal of International Money and
Finance, 48:291–313. Hotelling, H. (1929). Stability in competition.
Economic Journal, 39-153:41–57. Jaumotte, F. and Sodsriwiboon, P.
(2010). Current account imbalances in the southern euro area. IMF
Working Paper Series, 10-139:49. Juncker, J., Tusk, D., Dijsselbloem,
J., and Draghi, M. (2015). Preparing for next steps on better economic
governance in the euro area. Technical report, Informal European Council
Analytical Note. Kleinknecht, A. (1998). Is labour market flexibility
harmful to innovation? Cambridge Journal of Economics, 22-3:387–396.
Kleinknecht, A., Van Schaik, F., and Zhou, H. (2014). Is flexible labour
good for innovation? evidence from firm-leveldata. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 38:1207–1219. Lane, P. (2013). Capital flows in the euro
area. Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, European
Economy-Economic Papers, 497:54. Lavoie, M. (1992). Foundations of
Post-Keynesian Economic Analysis. Edward Elgar, Aldershot. Lavoie, M.
and Stockhammer, E. (2012). Wage-led growth: Concept, theories and
policies. International Labor Office. Conditions of Work and Employment
Series, 41. M., C. and Hessel, J. (2014). Current account imbalances in
the euro area: Competitiveness or financial cycle? DNB Working Papers,
443:51. Meyers, S. (1984). Capital Structure Puzzle. Journal of Finance,
39-3:575–592. of the European Council, G. S. (2011). Conclusions of the
european council, 24/25 march 2011 the euro plus pact. stronger economic
policy coordination for competitiveness and convergence. annex i to
european council conclusions, 24-25 march 2011. Technical report,
European Council. Onaran, O. and Galanis, G. (2012a). Is aggregate
demand wage-led or profit-led? National and global effects.
International Labor Office. Conditions of Work and Employment Series,
40:65. Onaran, O. and Galanis, G. (2012b). Is aggregate demand wage-led
or profit-led? national and global effects. ILO Working Papers,
Conditions of Work and Employment Branch, 40:74. Onaran, O. and Obst, T.
(2016). Wage-led growth in the eu15 member-states: the effects of income
distribution on growth, investment, trade balance and inflation.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 40-6:1517–1551. Petrovic, M., Ozel, B.,
Teglio, A., Raberto, M., and Cincotti, S. (2017). Eurace open: An
agent-based multi-country model. Working Paper Srries of the Economics
Department of the Universitat Jaume I, Castelln (Spain), 2017-09:76.
Riccetti, L., Russo, A., and Gallegati, M. (2015). An agent-based
decentralized matching macroeconomic model. Journal of Economic
Interaction and Coordination, 10-2:305–332. Riccetti, L., Russo, A., and
Gallegati, M. (2016). Financialisation and crisis in an agent based
macroeconomic model. Economic Modelling, 52(PA):162–172. Salle, I. and
Yildizoglu, M. (2014). Efficient sampling and meta-modeling for
computational economic models. Computational Economics, 44-4:507–536.
Salop, S. C. (1979). Monopolistic competition with outside goods. The
Bell Journal of Economics, 10-1:141–156. Sinn, H. (2014a). Austerity,
growth and inflation: Remarks on the eurozones unresolved
competitiveness problem. World Economy, 37-1:1–13. Sinn, H. (2014b). The
Euro Trap. On Bursting Bubbles, Budgets, and Beliefs. Oxford University
Press. Smets, F. and Wouters, R. (2007). Shocks and frictions in us
business cycles: A bayesian dsge approach. American Economic Review,
97:586–606. Stanley, M., Buldyrev, S., Havhn, S., Mantegna, R.,
Salinger, M., and Stanley, E. (1995). Zipf plots 32


and the size distribution of firms. Economic Letters, 49:453–457.
Steindl, J. (1952). Maturity and Stagnation in American Capitalism.
Blackwell. Stockhammer, E. (2011). Peripheral europes debt and german
wages: the role of wage policy in the euro area. International Journal
of Public Policy, 7-1/2/3:83–96. Stockhammer, E., Constantine, C., and
Reissl, S. (2016). Explaining the euro crisis: Current account
imbalances, credit booms and economic policy in different economic
paradigms. Post Keynesian Economics Study Group Working Paper Series,
1617:–. Stockhammer, E. and Onaran, O. (2013). Wage-led growth: theory,
evidence, policy. Review of Keynesian Economics, pages 61–78.
Stockhammer, E., Onaran, O., and Ederer, S. (2009). Functional income
distribution and aggregate demand in the euro area. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 33-1:139–159. Stockhammer, E. and Sotiropoulos, D. (2014).
Rebalancing the euro area: the costs of internal devaluation. Review of
Political Economy, 26-2:210–233. Storm, S. and Naastepad, C. (2015a).
Europes hunger games: Income distribution, cost competitiveness and
crisis. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 39-3:959–986. Storm, S. and
Naastepad, C. (2015b). Nairu economics and the eurozone crisis.
International Review of Applied Economics, 29-6:843–877. Storm, S. and
Naastepad, C. W. M. (2012). Macroeconomics Beyond the NAIRU. Harvard
University Press. Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules
in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
39-1:195–214. Unger, R. (2017). Asymmetric credit growth and current
account imbalances in the euro area. Journal of International Money and
Finance, 73:435–451. Uribe, M. and Schmitt-Grohé, S. (2017). Open
Economy Macroeconomics. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Vergeer, R. and Kleinknecht, A. (2014). Do labor market reforms reduce
labor productivity growth: A panel data analysis of 20 OECD countries
(1960-2004). International Labour Review, 153(3):365–393.



A

Baseline Setup Table 2: Parameters K: Number of countries H: Number of
Households lS : Workers’ labor supply ψ: Matching parameter υ: Wage
revision probability parameter υH : Wage revision probability households
υF : Wage revision probability firms φ0 : Initial productivity τ0 :
Initial tax rate cy : Propensity to consume out of income cD :
Propensity to consume out of wealth δ: Adaptive Parameter cT : Share of
tradable β: Hotelling circle parameter λ: Liquidity preference parameter
θ: Share of sales as inventories γ: R\&D expenditure parameter ν: R\&D
success probability parameter ρ: Share of profits distributed ζ: Deposit
interest-discount rate ratio µ1 : Total credit supply parameter

5 500 1.0 10 1.625 0.7 1.0 1.0 0.4 0.9 0.1 0.03 0.4 2.0 0.2 0.2 0.03 0.8
0.95 0.1 20

µ2 : Minimal reserve requirement parameter ιl : Loan probability
parameter χ: Loan interest parameter ιb : Bond probability parameter rre
: Interest paid on banks’ reserves rb0 : Initial interest on bonds w0 :
Initial wage r̄: Taylor rule long run interest rate ξ: Taylor rule
adjustment speed parameter ξ ∆P : Taylor rule sensitivity to inflation
∆P : Inflation Target dmax : Maximum deficit-GDP ratio taumin :
Minimum tax rate taumax : Maximum tax rate gmin : Minimum G/GDP gmax :
Maximum G/GDP η: Banks-firms minimum proportion $: Minimum investment
threshold parameter A0 : First firms’ initial net worth σ: Banks’
minimum dimension relative to firms

0.1 0.5 0.003 0.1 0.0 0.001 1.0 0.0075 0.8 2 0.005 0.03 0.35 0.45 0.4
0.6 0.1 0.1 10.0 4

Table 3: Baseline summary

Variable Real GDP Growth Labor Productivity Growth Inflation
Unemployment Public Debt/GDP Private Loans/GDP Public Deficit/GDP
Exports/GDP Imports/GDP Public Expenditure/GDP R\&D Investment/GDP
Household investment to GDP ratio

2 Countries

5 Countries

10 Countries

Euro Area (years)

1.05 (0.051) 1.05 (0.051) 2.37 (0.084) 13.1 (1.344) 116.9 (15.241) 138.5
(10.586) 1.0 (0.165) 18.5 (0.989) 18.5 (0.969) 45.1 (1.021) 2.85 (0.087)
8.9 (0.161)

1.02 (0.045) 1.02 (0.045) 2.15 (0.058) 14.6 (0.668) 117.5 (27.004) 127.9
(8.780) 0.9 (0.235) 29.39 (0.353) 29.44 (0.344) 46.6 (0.755) 2.8 (0.069)
8.7 (0.081)

1.0 (0.046) 1.0 (0.046) 2.13 (0.055) 14.8 (0.623) 116.4 (40.58) 68.2
(6.798) 0.9 (0.352) 33.0 (0.461) 33.0 (0.263) 46.3 (0.650) 2.7 (0.071)
8.7 (0.085)

0.98 (04-15) 0.90 (04-13) 1.74 (04-15) 9.6 (98-15) 81.3 (06-15) 104.6
(06-15) 3.2 (06-15) 40.0 (04-15) 38.1 (04-15) 46.7 (06-15) 2.0 (06-15)
6.1 (06-15)

Table 3: Average simulated and empirical macro-variables in percentage
values. Simulated averages and standard error from 25 Monte Carlo
simulation runs. Empirical averages of Euro Area countries.



